Ayurveda, the Ancient Science of Hindus and Indians, dates back about 7000 years.
It has eight branches, one of which is Rasayana Tantra. The word rasayana literally
means the path that rasa takes (rasa: the primordial tissue or plasma; ayana: path)
(Charaka). It is also considered as the science which restores youth, alleviates suffering
(diseases) and bestows longevity (Sushruta). It is believed in Ayurveda, that the quali-
ties of the rasa-dhatu inﬂuence the health of other dhatus (tissues) of the body. Hence,
any medicine that improves the quality of rasa are called as rasayanas, resulting in the
strengthening or promoting of the qualities and health of all tissues of the body. These
rasayana plants are said to possess the following properties:
–   Prevent ageing
–   Re-establish youth
–   Strengthen life
–   Strengthen brain and mind
–   Prevent disease
–   Promote healthy longevity
   Rasayana Tantra appears to have been practiced as an independent clinical discip-
line primarily as a positive health medicine. With the passage of time this important
branch of knowledge has ceased to be in practice (except the knowledge and use of a
few herbs) in its appropriate form. Comprehensive efforts are needed to revive this
useful discipline for the welfare of humanity at large.
   The ability to adapt to a given habitat is a distinctive feature of all living organ-
isms. Any type of demand (external or internal) in this habitat elicits either a speciﬁc
or non-speciﬁc response (Selye,1983). This non-speciﬁc response to any demand has
been deﬁned as stress and the demand as stressor by Hans Selye. As per his description
there are three stages of response to any given situation of stress, which together
constitute the general adaptation syndrome (GAS) (Selye,1946), the stages being a) alarm
reaction b) resistance and c) exhaustion. Thus, the ability to develop resistance and to
maintain it is crucial for coping with a variety of stressors encountered in human life.
The desire to control the coping mechanisms has led to the origin of the science of
adaptation. The branch of Ayurveda which deals with the science of adaptation is called
Rasayana Tantra. Ayurveda may not coin the term adaptogen, but those practices, or
substances / herbs / medicines which help a person cope with his day to day stresses are
known in Ayurveda as Rasayanas. Modern research has proved that herbs listed as
Rasayanas possess adaptogenic properties as well (Dahanukar, 1986.).
   All of the above imply that they improve and increase the resistance of the body.
The scientiﬁc studies carried out on most of the rasayana herbs showed that these
                                                                                Foreword ix
plants non-speciﬁcally activated the reticuloendothelial system (RES) and other com-
ponents of the immune system as well (Dahanukar, 1986). Knowing that the central
nervous system, endocrine system and the immune system participate in intense cross-
talk (Ader et al., 1990; Glaser and Kiecolt-Glaser, 1994), it was easy to hypothesize
that by acting on the immune system these rasayanas could exert broad-based effects
by initiating a massive cascade of events involving various neurotransmitters, hor-
mones and amines of the stress response cycle.
   With the emerging science of ecogenetics, it is becoming evident that genetic
predisposition can alter responses to the external environment. However, at present
most of the data is on diseases, which manifest in genetically predisposed persons on
exposure to the external stressors. Can rasayanas (or adaptogens or immunomodulators)
inﬂuence genetic control and favour the maintenance of homeostasis in stressful situ-
ations? The research on Amruta (Tinospora cordifolia) opens up a new vision in this
direction, as early experiments have shown that it increases the bone marrow proliferat-
ive fractions leading to leucocytosis. A slight increase in dose reverses this process and
inducing apoptosis, and this apparent paradox was believed to be because of its effect on
c-myc, a gene that causes both proliferation as well as induces apoptosis depending on
the environment. These are some of the recent advances seen in the ﬁeld of rasayana
drugs. Looking at it it appears that rasayana herbs act as:

–   an adaptogen
–   an immunostimulant
–   an immunomodulater
–   pro-host probiotic
–   anti-mutagenic

   But Ayurveda has much more in it to be included under rasayana therapy. Looking
at only a few herbs will be doing an injustice to the holistic approach of Ayurveda,
hence a brief description of Rasayana Tantra may be necessary here.
   According to Ayurvedic concept rasayana therapy simultaneously affects the
body and the mind and bring about physical and psychic improvement. This therapy
prevents the effects of early ageing, develops intelligence and increases the body-
resistance against diseases.
   Rasayana means vitalizing / rejuvenating. In the words of Charaka with a rasayana,
one obtains longevity, regains youth, vitality and vigour, gets a sharp memory, intellect and
freedom from diseases, gets a lustrous complexion and the strength of a horse. Sushruta is more
speciﬁc, describing a rasayana as one which, is anti-ageing, increases life-span, promotes
intelligence and memory and increases resistance to disease.
   Any drug, diet or conduct that leads to the replenishment of the dhatus and enlivens
the body and mind is rasayana. Rasayana not only rejuvenates the body and mind, it
also prevents disease. There are a number of drugs/materials described which possess
the qualities of maintaining health, prolonging life and warding off diseases. They are
all grouped as rasayana in Ayurveda. A close look at the concept of rasayana of
Ayurveda and various research ﬁndings on rasayana suggests that rasayana therapy/
drug may have its effect on our ojas, immunity, resistance, etc. Hence the following points
related to the concept of resistance, immunity as described in Ayurveda may be useful:

1. The qualitative, quantitative and functional balance of the body-elements main-
   tains strength which, in general, causes resistance to diseases. Raktam (Blood) has
x   Foreword
   been attached much importance because it’s normal condition reﬂects good health
   and general resistance power.
2. Ayurveda has described a separate substance named ojas which has been said
   to be the essence of all the dhatus and is considered to be an excellent body
   element. Therefore, the excellence of the body in totality is ojas. It reﬂects
   the excellent performance of the man as a whole. Therefore, resistance power of
   the body depends on the quality and quantity of ojas.
3. Bala (strength or power) has been classiﬁed as sahaja (natural, hereditary), kalakrita
   (variable as per age and season) and yuktikrita (acquired by good diet, drug
   and exercise etc.). This is why some families have a speciﬁc resistance to speciﬁc
   diseases; some diseases are born in a speciﬁc age and season and generally speaking
   those, who are well built, fall less ill.
4. Again the bala (resistance) has been divided into vyadhi pratibandhakatwa and
   vyadhi bala virodhitwa bala. The former is the speciﬁc resistance against
   a speciﬁc disease so that those diseases will never afﬂict the man. Today, vaccines
   substitute this type of resistance. The latter does not stop the onset of the disease
   but can only minimise its severity. In another context it has been said that the
   overweight or emaciated, those of weak build, who have a deﬁcient diet and who
   are mentally weak, are more susceptible to disease (Ch.Su.28/7).

   There are various ways of classifying rasayana therapy in Ayurveda. They are basi-
cally either based on the method of administering the rasayana therapy, such as kuti-
pravesika (indoor) or vataatapika (outdoor); or based on the effect. Kaamya (invigorating
and vitalizing), medhya (promoting intellectual factors), achara (address psycho-somatic
activities), naimittika (used to promote resistance against disease following illness)
and vrishya (virilifying or sex-stimulant). Also remember that Rasayana Tantra is one
of the eight branches (Asthanga Ayurveda) of Ayurveda. And, before administering
rasayana the individual needs to undergo the shodana/panchakarma (puriﬁcation therapy)
process. Kaya-kalpa is nothing but another name for rasayana.
   The importance of Ayurveda in countries outside of India continues to increase. In
order to meet the demand in the United Kingdom for qualiﬁed personnel, there
has been established, for the ﬁrst time in the UK, a ﬁrst degree course in the subject
at Thames Valley University. It is a three-year degree course with the opportunity
afterwards for continuing the course in India for a fourth year at Kottakal (or Manipal
University). This degree course is run in conjunction with the world’s ﬁrst Charitable
Ayurvedic Hospital outside of India and Sri Lanka which is based in London.
   In the light of the extreme importance of rasayana in Ayurvedic therapy it is
appropriate that Dr Harsharnjit Puri’s book on rasanaya is being published by Taylor
& Francis. I congratulate him on producing this excellent reference book with detailed
explanations on the activity of each drug.
   However, as a persistent defender of the intellectual property and patent rights of
Ayurvedic doctors and Indian Ayurveda, I hope that this book will be read by those
with a spirit of learning and not as a commercial tool for attempts to synthesize these
medicines or for using them as herbs in non-Ayurvedic traditions.

Global warming and global travel are among the factors resulting in the spread of such
infectious diseases as malaria, tuberculosis, hepatitis B and HIV. All these are not well
controlled by the present drug regimes. Antibiotics too are failing because of bacterial
resistance. Formerly less well known tropical diseases are reaching new shores. A
whole range of illnesses, for example cancer, occur worldwide. Advances in molecular
biology, including methods of in vitro testing for a required medical activity give new
opportunities to draw judiciously upon the use and research of traditional herbal
remedies from around the world. The re-examining of the herbal medicines must be
done in a multidisciplinary manner.
   Since 1997 twenty volumes have been published in the Book Series Medicinal and
Aromatic Plants – Industrial Proﬁles. The series continues. It is characterised by a
single plant genus per volume. With the same Series Editor, this new series Tradi-
tional Herbal Medicines for Modern Times, covers multi genera per volume. It
accommodates for example, the Traditional Chinese Medicines (TCM), the Japanese
Kampo versions of this and the Ayurvedic formulations of India. Collections of plants
are also brought together because they have been re-evaluated for the treatment of
speciﬁc diseases, such as malaria, tuberculosis, cancer, diabetes, etc. Yet other col-
lections are of the most recent investigations of the endemic medicinal plants of
a particular country, e.g. of India, South Africa, Mexico, Brazil (with its vast ﬂora), or
of Malaysia with its rainforests said to be the oldest in the world, etc.
   Each volume reports on the latest developments and discusses key topics relevant to
interdisciplinary health science research by ethnobiologists, taxonomists, conservation-
ists, agronomists, chemists, pharmacologists, clinicians and toxicologists. The Series is
relevant to all these scientists and will enable them to guide business, government
agencies and commerce in the complexities of these matters. The background to the
subject is outlined below.
   Over many centuries, the safety and limitations of herbal medicines have been
established by their empirical use by the healers who also took a holistic approach. The
healers are aware of the infrequent adverse affects and know how to correct these when
they occur. Consequently and ideally, the pre-clinical and clinical studies of a herbal
medicine need to be carried out with the full cooperation of the traditional healer. The
plant composition of the medicine, the stage of the development of the plant material,
when it is to be collected from the wild or when from cultivation, its post-harvest
treatment, the preparation of the medicine, the dosage and frequency and much other
essential information is required. A consideration of the intellectual property rights
and appropriate models of beneﬁt sharing may also be necessary.
                                                                
   Wherever the medicine is being prepared, the ﬁrst requirement is a well docu-
mented reference collection of dried plant material. Such collections are encouraged by
organisations like the World Health Organisation and the United Nations Industrial
Development Organisation. The Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew in the UK is building
up its collection of traditional Chinese dried plant material relevant to its purchase
and use by those who sell or prescribe TCM in the UK.
   In any country, the control of the quality of plant raw material, of its efﬁcacy and of
its safety in use, are essential. The work requires sophisticated laboratory equipment
and highly trained personnel. This kind of control cannot be applied to the locally
produced herbal medicines in the rural areas of many countries, on which millions of
people depend. Local traditional knowledge of the healers has to sufﬁce.
   Conservation and protection of plant habitats is required and breeding for biolog-
ical diversity is important. Gene systems are being studied for medicinal exploitation.
There can never by too many seed conservation banks to conserve genetic diversity.
Unfortunately such banks are usually dominated by agricultural and horticultural
crops with little space for medicinal plants. Developments such as random ampliﬁed
polymorphic DNA enable the genetic variability of a species to be checked. This can
be helpful in deciding whether specimens of close genetic similarity warrant storage.
   From ancient times, a great deal of information concerning diagnosis and the use
of traditional herbal medicines has been documented in the scripts of China, India
and elsewhere. Today, modern formulations of these medicines exist in the form of
e.g. powders, granules, capsules and tablets. They are prepared in various institutions
e.g. government hospitals in China and Korea, and by companies such as Tsumura
Co. of Japan with good quality control. Similarly, products are produced by many
other companies in India, the USA and elsewhere with a varying degree of quality
control. In the USA, the dietary supplement and Health Education Act of 1994
recognised the class of physiotherapeutic agents derived from medicinal and arom-
atic plants. Furthermore, under public pressure, the US Congress set up an Ofﬁce
of Alternative Medicine and this ofﬁce in 1994 assisted the ﬁling of several Inves-
tigational New Drug (IND) applications, required for clinical trials of some Chinese
herbal preparations. The signiﬁcance of these applications was that each Chinese pre-
paration involved several plants and yet was handled as a single IND. A demonstra-
tion of the contribution to efﬁcacy, of each ingredient of each plant, was not required.
This was a major step forward towards more sensible regulations with regard to
phytomedicines.
   Something of the subject of western herbal medicines is now being taught again to
medical students in Germany and Canada. Throughout Europe, the USA, Australia
and other countries pharmacy and health-related schools are increasingly offering
training in phytotherapy.
   TCM clinics are now common outside of China. An Ayurvedic Hospital now exists
in London and a degree course in Ayurveda is also available here.
   The term integrated medicine is now being used which selectively combines tradi-
tional herbal medicine with modern medicine. In Germany there is now a hospital in
which TCM is integrated with western medicine. Such co-medication has become
common in China, Japan, India, and North America by those educated in both sys-
tems. Beneﬁts claimed include improved efﬁcacy, reduction in toxicity and the period
of medication, as well as a reduction in the cost of the treatment. New terms such
as adjunct therapy, supportive therapy, and supplementary medicine now appear as a
xiv Preface to the series
consequence of such co-medication. Either medicine may be described as an adjunct to
the other depending on the communicator’s view.
   Great caution is necessary when traditional herbal medicines are used by those
doctors not trained in their use and likewise when modern medicines are used by
traditional herbal doctors. Possible dangers from drug interactions need to be stressed.
   I ﬁnd exceedingly helpful the CAB abstracts Review of Aromatic and Medicinal Plants,
editor Debbie J. Cousins of CABI Publishing, Wallingford, Oxon, 0X10 8DE, UK.
Email; cabi@cabi.org
   Many thanks are due to the staff of Taylor & Francis who have made this series
possible and especially to the volume editors and their chapter contributors for the
authoritative information.
                                                                  Dr Roland Hardman
                                                                         January 2002
Preface




Ayurveda – the science of life, has been divided into eight disciplines. Whereas the
ﬁrst six disciplines can be easily related to similar topics of modern medical science,
the last two Rasayana and Vajikarna, are unique in themselves and until recently were
least understood. Initially Rasayana was equated with tonics, elixirs and alteratives,
which helped rejuvenation of all systems in the body and hence longevity. Vajikarna,
also spelled Bajikarna – which means to impart (sexual) power of the horse, and also
translates as the science of procreation, were considered aphrodisiacs.
   This overemphasis on herbs as elixirs and for sexual purposes is not unique to
Ayurveda; the study of other oriental materia medica reveals more or less the same story.
Recent developments have also shown that the concept of sexual deﬁciencies, real or
imaginary, is widespread all over the world in different populations, as has became
evident from the success of a preparation for erectile dysfunction (impotence) in males.
   Whereas in modern times the emphasis is on sexual pleasure, in ancient India the
preparations were required for reproduction to replenish the depleted population.
Manpower was required, not only for day-to-day agricultural and industrial activities
but also for wars to defend the existing territory and to acquire more land from nature
and from other communities. With little knowledge in the prevention and cure of
diseases, the death rate was very high, both from natural and unnatural causes. It
necessitated the search for herbs, which would not only help in reproduction but also
in prolonging life by keeping the body healthy and disease free.
   The herbs used for the above purposes had diverse physiological actions on the
body, such as sexual stimulant, tranquilizer, liver protection, diuretic, bronchiodilator,
etc. When subjected to detailed pharmacological activity in the last century, in most
cases these herbs had a mild pharmacological effect on the body and it was said that
herbs used as Rasayana and Vajikarna helped the body due to their placebo effect.
   After India’s independence in 1947, more attention was paid to research on Indian
medicinal plants, particularly those used in Ayurveda, but for about half a century
much of the information on these herbs remained conﬁned to India, as most of these
research ﬁndings were published in Indian journals, which had only local circulation
and were not even abstracted by multinational publishers. The international journals
at that time were not interested in the publication of the routine type of research
work, or the Ayurvedic polyherbal, polymineral preparations, processed in the tradi-
tional way, where nothing was known about the exact chemical nature of the active
constituents with certainty. Mostly the articles on Indian medicines submitted
to these journals were returned back to the author with the remark local interest only.
   Studies on ginseng, Panax ginseng, was a trendsetter for research on herbs, considered
xvi   Preface
as a tonic. Ginseng did not have a strong pharmacological activity but it showed
diverse beneﬁcial effects on the human body. In the meantime, in the Soviet Union
(the present Russia and other Republics), a new group of herbs, called adaptogens,
were discovered. It was observed that by the use of these herbs, the body adapts itself
to adverse environmental conditions. These herbs were found to combat stress, kept
infections away by their immunomodulating activity and thus helped to promote a
long life of good quality.
   Recent research has shown that many Ayurvedic herbs used as Rasayana act as
adaptogens. In this book, an effort has been made to refer to all the lesser known
articles on these herbs, so that the interested reader may obtain detailed information
about them. In addition to these, some other herbs, which in Indian folklore are
considered to have Rasayana type activities, have also been included, with the hope
that further research on them may discover some new therapeutic active substance.
   In the introductory chapters of the book the concept of Rasayana, and an allied
subject Tridosha is explained, along with the methods used for preparing various
Ayurvedic products. The main part of the text is concerned with the herbs used as
Rasayana: each chapter is devoted to a single herb. In the Contents, the Indian names
of these herbs are followed by their botanical names in parentheses. In the text,
English names are also mentioned; botanical and Indian names are italicized. While
describing various formulations, to avoid confusion, instead of botanical binomial
nomenclature, mostly generic names of the plants are given. Where more than one
part of the herb is used, the plant part is given along with the name of the herb. In the
cases where a particular herb is processed, speciﬁc information about this has been
provided. When describing a herb, Ayurvedic name, botanical name, brief description,
distribution of the plant and illustration is followed by its uses in folklore and Ayurveda.
Brief information on pharmacology and therapeutic studies have also been provided if
recent research conﬁrms the common claims for the herb. An account of some import-
ant polyherbal, polymineral formulations used as Rasayana and Vajikarna, are also
given.
   When Dr R. Hardman, the series editor, mentioned the new series, Traditional
Herbal Medicine for the Modern Times, I suggested he include a book on Rasayana. In the
earlier part of my career, I had surveyed the literature and conducted some research on
the plants used in both Rasayana and Vajikarna. The present book, which describes
herbs, is the ﬁrst part of the study on Rasayana. In the second part, information will
been given about the role that Rasayana plays in our daily life, along with a descrip-
tion of animal products, gems and minerals. I am grateful to Dr Hardman for the
guidance and help while preparing the manuscript for the book. During my stay at
Herb Pharm Inc., Williams (Or. USA), Mr Ed Smith was kind enough to provide me
with a computer and other facilities during the preparation of the manuscript. Thanks
are also due to Dr Naresh, of the Institute of Microbial Technology, Chandigarh
(India), for library help and occasional discussion, Mr V.K. Sawhney for typing some
sections and Mr Naresh Bagga, for the line drawings of the plants.
   My son Avon Puri, my wife Harminder Puri, Thorin Halverson, Ashneet Puri and
Vikram Malhotra also helped me during the preparation of the manuscript for this
book.
                                                                                   H.S. Puri
                                                                        Introduction 1

1      Introduction




Disease (dis-ease), is the disturbance of ease i.e. comfort, freedom from constraint,
annoyance, awkwardness, pain or trouble both bodily and mental. Since time imme-
morial, man has tried to lead a disease free life. In one of the oldest repositories of
human knowledge, vedas of Aryans (veda means to know, knowledge), the plants with
medicinal virtues have been identiﬁed as oushidhis which are to be distinguished from
ahara the edible plants. After vedas, further developments in various spheres of human
life gave rise to Indian medicine called Ayurveda (Ayuh – life, veda – science).
Dhanwantri, said to be the father of Indian medicine, lived in 7th century BC., as
compared to Hippocrates who lived in 5th century BC. After Dhanwantri, the system
of Ayurveda developed further, and peaked at the time of Charak Sanhita and Sushrut
Sanhita, the treatises on medicine and surgery written about 1000 BC to 1000 AD.
Charak Sanhita is said to be a compilation of proceedings of a symposium held in the
Himalayas, to discuss the cure of various diseases which had originated at that time
due to urbanization. For this purpose, the ancient scholar divided Ayurveda into the
following eight disciplines:

1   Internal medicine
2   Ophthalmology and otorhinolaryngology
3   Surgery
4   Toxicology
5   Psychiatry
6   Paediatrics
7   Rasayana, which in broad terms means rejuvenator
8   Vajikarna, the literal meaning is to have the sex power of a horse, but is often
    considered as fertility inducer or procreator.

  As the present studies show, it is difﬁcult to distinguish between Rasayana and
Vajikarna. The sexual system is fully dependent on the proper function of mind and
body, so a good Vajikarna has to be a good Rasayana. Initially Rasayana preparations
were herbal and were prescribed as dietary supplements. Some were administered
under controlled conditions, whereas the Vajikarna included poisons, minerals, animal
products and narcotics like Cannabis and opium.
  Further developments in Ayurveda took place with the incorporation of herbs dis-
covered in other countries and by contacts with medical scholars from other parts of
the world. These developments lead to the incorporation of more and more substances,
particularly minerals in Ayurvedic materia medica. By the time of Bhavparkasha in the
2   Introduction
ﬁfteenth century AD, Ayurveda had become a composite science, covering all aspects
of human activities, even including recipes on nutritive foods.
   Initially, Ayurveda developed as the medical science of the Aryans settled mainly in
the Indo-Gangetic region, but later, ﬁndings of physicians from other parts of India
were also incorporated into it. In east and south India, Ayurveda developed with the
same basic principles but with a focus on local ﬂora, and on physiotherapy. Progress in
gemology and metallurgy had its effect on medicine also. For boosting the effects of
herbal preparations, a large number of minerals, particularly mercury, with a miraculous
power against microbes, became an integral part of Ayurvedic treatments (for details
see chapter on Some Rasayana Formulations).
   During all these stages, Ayurveda covered all aspects of human life. The aim was
not only to make a man healthy but happy too. It did not deal with man and medicine
only, but with a way of life, which included social, moral, and religious education,
based on very intricate philosophies of Indian sages. These learned men postulated
many theories. They gave their views about the origin of the universe, the composition
of matter, and the actions and interactions in our environment, which disturb the
systems of our bodies and gives rise to many diseases and discomforts. Ayurveda
combined philosophy with science, so the life processes, which cannot be understood
by wisdom (budhi) have been explained on the basis of reasoning (yukti). These philoso-
phical thoughts are too complex for the present purposes and only the salient features,
in a simpliﬁed manner, are given in the following chapters.
   It was postulated that human health is related to constitution of body, age, sex,
geographical region, race, ancestry, and resistance power or immunity. Good health is
something more than the absence of diseases or inﬁrmity. It is a state of complete
mental, physical and social well being. As per Ayurvedic theories, the approach to
health is holistic, with less emphasis on symptomatic relief. Treatment does not mean
healing the affected part or a particular system, but the whole body. The treatment
aims at correcting the site of origin of disease, the channels of accumulation and the
site of manifestation of body poisons. For example, when there is a breathing problem,
in the conventional system antispasmodics and bronchodilators are prescribed but in
Ayurveda polyherbal preparations are given, in which some of the ingredients may
have an antispasmodic effect but some others act on the stomach and intestine, from
where the disease might have originated. This diagnosis is based on tridosha, the three
biological factors in the human systems, around which Ayurvedic physiology, patho-
logy and therapeutics revolve. In broad terms tridosha represents metabolic disturb-
ances, and various treatments are given to keep the three doshas in order. Balancing
of the doshas is required for a good old age and also for the day-to-day activities of
modern life. It has been stressed that medicaments, particularly Rasayana, work only if
the conditions within the body are conducive for their effect. During treatment, due
importance has also been given to the mind, which is a powerful agent in causation
and cure of diseases. Emotions, anger and pride are also treated as diseases. These affect
the health, happiness and longevity of an individual.
   Recent studies also conﬁrm these observations. According to a leading Indian cardio-
logist (Dr H.S. Wasir) negative emotions like greed, ego, anger and too much materi-
alistic attachment lead to high blood pressure, aggravation of angina and heart attack.
Positive emotions have a beneﬁcial effect on heart function and prevent an upsurge in
blood pressure. Music, meditation, and yogic excesses help in settling the mind.
A good way of life is also conducive to good health. Aachar – good conduct, Vichar
                                                                          Introduction 3
– good thoughts, Vyahar – good interpersonal dealing, and Ahar – good food habits,
help. Both malnutrition and over-nutrition adversely affect our health and longevity.
Over-nutrition is excessive intake of calories, saturated fats of animal origin, sugar and
lack of complex carbohydrates from tubers. The diseases affecting longevity are hyper-
tension, brain stroke, cancer, diabetes, obesity, cirrhosis and other hepatic disorders,
alcoholism, cardiomyopathy, and AIDS etc. The ancient Indian physicians were aware
of these, and most of the herbs prescribed as Rasayana treated one or more of the above
diseases.
4   What are Rasayana?

2      What are Rasayana?




The agents which cure body and mental diseases, delay old age, increase mental power,
generating power, vital energy, eyesight, impart intelligence, memory, aid proper
digestion and clear complexion are Rasayana (Shastri, 1979). These nourish the whole
body by strengthening the primordial tissue Rasa, the essence of all food we take, and
which the body can assimilate. If this essence is well distributed in all systems, the
body remains healthy. By their physico-chemical action Rasayana purify and promote
dhatus (tissue). They augment the body’s disease resistance capacity, as well as the
ability for restorative reaction and counteract all the deleterious effects including that
of ageing.
   The Rasayana keep tissues, enzymes, membranes and tranquility of the mind in
their normal functioning conditions through anabolic processes. They help if the
tissues have become inactive, are to be revitalized and their composition changed.
They achieve this by increasing bala, the physiological and immunological strength of
the body. They are good for all people, at all stages, at all times but they do not
prevent ageing and do not assure immortality.
   Rasayana may be compared to alteratives, which work as blood cleansers by their
diuretic and antihepatotoxic action. Alteratives also restore the proper functions of
the body and increase health and vitality (Hoffmann, 1998). They alter the body’s
metabolism in various ways so that the tissue can best deal with the range of function
from nutrition to elimination. Some of these herbs eliminate waste from the body
through kidney, liver, lung or skin, while others work by stimulating digestive functions
and still others act as antimicrobial agents. Some Rasayana also help in the disposal of
waste ama. Agni is the biological ﬁre burning inside the body, which acts on food so
that energy is generated by digestion. If waste is not excreted from the body properly
and ama is deposited in the tissues, it may disturb various systems. The herbs are
given to strengthen the tissue to counteract all the ill effects of ama.
   In Ayurveda, human life has been divided into four spans according to growth and
development:

1   From birth to the age of 20, all tissues of the body grow.
2   20– 40 years of age, tissues continue to grow.
3   40–60 years is the age of stagnation. If an individual has a balanced diet, cheerful
    life, adequate nourishment, and is free of worries and anxiety, the person can
    maintain good health. At this stage the mental activities expand, and power of
    judgment increases.
                                                                What are Rasayana?     5
4    After the age of 60, in spite of good quality of life, senescence starts. Metabolism
     of the tissues decreases, waste is not excreted properly, and the bone joints become
     dry and ﬁxed.

   The body can be rejuvenated at stages 3 and 4 and during senescence by Rasayana.
These can be used as a dietary supplement, but in the case of chronic diseases, old age,
etc. where kaya kalp (rejuvenation) is required, a special treatment, called Rasayana
therapy, is provided under the supervision of medical experts.


RASAYANA THERAPY

Before the start of actual therapy, the internal and external organs of the body are
cleansed and the system is made more receptive to assimilation of medication. It has
been stressed that Rasayana administered without these treatments is like seed sown
on barren land, from where no good results can be expected. This pretreatment is
given only to those persons who have enough strength to bear it.

Pretreatment for Rasayana therapy

Samshodhna (Diet restriction)
One week before the start of therapy, the person should resort to a simple diet
consisting of only steamed vegetables and fresh fruits. He should not be given sugar,
alcohol or animal products. Milk and honey are allowed.

Purvakarma (Preparatory treatment)
Involves massage with warm oil, and application of heat on the body by a massage
therapist. The massage should be so vigorous that a large amount of latent heat of
the body is generated. For this purpose sesame oil is generally used but some-
times some other medicated oils, which are supposed to have better properties, are
applied.

Panchkarma (Cleansing of internal organs of the body)

    Virechna     purging to clean the small intestine
    Basti        to clean the large intestine
    Vamna        emetics to clean the stomach
    Naysya       nasal drops to clear the respiratory passage
    Raktaoksha   bloodletting by leeches may be done to those patients who have
                 excess of blood in their body. Nowadays blood is donated to the
                 blood bank. It is optional.
6   What are Rasayana?
Administration of herbs
After panchkarma the patient is admitted into a hut (kuti prveshika) for the administra-
tion of Rasayana preparations. The hut should be in a pollution-free area, well venti-
lated, facing north, and painted with slaked lime to make it germ-free.
   The preparations required during Rasayana therapy vary, at the discretion of the health
provider. Generally the patient is given a restricted diet, along with only that quantity
of medication which the patient can easily digest. The medicine should be fully util-
ized by the body and not passed into faeces undigested. The medicine should not create
any digestive disturbance, such as indigestion, hyperacidity or constipation. If any of
these conditions persist for some time, a laxative or a colon cleanser should be given.
   Herbs such as garlic, neem, amalaki, etc. were commonly used for this therapy but
now polyherbal preparations with animal products such as musk, amber, coral, pearl,
gems, minerals, and metals are prescribed. Some of the formulations may consist of red
sulphide of mercury, prepared in the presence of gold, along with processed poisonous
herbs like aconite, nux vomica, etc. The preparation is given to the patient in the early
hours of the morning (within three hours of sunrise). During administration of mercurial
compounds, the patient should have a pure vegetarian diet. He should not remain
thirsty or hungry. He should avoid excessive sleep, swimming, talking, anger, sadness,
desire, excessive happiness, bathing, worry, irritation, depression, sex, and fragrances.
He should lead a simple, pious, and religious life.
   After kuti prevesh, the patient should start steadily with a diet of rice water, followed
by rice gruel, rice and split beans, rice with beans, and ﬁnally he may be given a
normal diet with a teaspoonful of ghee (butter oil). The patient should remain in a
relaxed condition, and should have a whole body massage daily with warm sesame oil.
This treatment is said to make the arteries softer and smoother, the constitution of the
blood changes, clots are dissolved, and new cells are formed.


RASAYANA AND VAJIKARNA

Vajikarna are Ayurvedic aphrodisiacs, and may be used in place of Rasayana. There is
no clear-cut distinction between the two, and these may be substituted for each other.
In general Vajikarna are used for the production and puriﬁcation of shukra (this term
is used for vital ﬂuid, and also for sperm and spermatic ﬂuid). The vital ﬂuid is con-
sidered the essence of all functions of the body, which result in fame, beauty, strength
and power. It is the result of all metabolic activities of the human body. If any system
of the body is disturbed, the formation of vital ﬂuid does not take place, but in a
person who is healthy, energetic, active, has good digestion, sleep, active life, nutritive
diet, regulated routine, a good household atmosphere, affectionate wife, and who
consumes milk, ghee, citrus fruits and stays away from excessive amorous activities, the
vital ﬂuid does not get depleted and hence these persons do not require any medica-
tion (aphrodisiac).

Some recent research on Rasayana and Vajikarna
Puri (1970a, b, 1971, 1972) gave an account of the herbs used in various Rasayana and
Vajikarna preparations. The other studies carried out on these aspects are as follows:
                                                               What are Rasayana?     7
For mental diseases
Udupa (1973) was the ﬁrst to study the effects of herbs used as Rasayana on psycho-
somatic stress. Singh and Murthy (1989) treated patients with epilepsy syndrome with
various Rasayana preparations for one year. Seventy-ﬁve per cent of patients had less
severe ﬁts. Dwivedi and Singh (1992) prescribed Medhya Rasayana (the herbs said to
be a brain tonic), for convulsive disorders. The treatment showed signiﬁcant improve-
ment in terms of frequency, duration and severity of seizures. Pandey and Pandey
(1995) used Rasayana because of their sedative and tranquillizing property for the
treatment of psychological and psychosomatic disorders. These preparations reduced
anxiety, apprehension, and kept the mind calm and cool.

As adaptogens and immunomodulators
Srivastava et al. (1990) tried Rasalyana preparations on people/persons exposed to high
altitudes. These herbs also helped in generalized weakness ( Jayaram et al. 1993).
Praveen Kumar et al. (1994) noted that the oral administration of Rasayana prepara-
tions protected mice from cyclophosphamide-induced leukopaenia. In this case white
blood cell count increased and there was an increase in bone marrow cellularity. The
herbs were found useful in chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression.
   Wagner (1994), after a detailed study, concluded that Rasayana preparations, which
act both as herbal immunostimulants and adaptogens, regulate the immunological
and endocrine systems, with relative low doses, without damaging the autoregulative
functions of the organisms. These induced a general increase in non-speciﬁc resistance
against infectious and non-infectious stresses. Mulgund and Uchil (1994) noted that
herbal formulations used as Rasayana were powerful immunostimulants. All the groups
treated with these herbal extracts showed a signiﬁcant increase in macrophage func-
tion, indicating their role in protection against stress. The rise in plasma cortisol
following stress was inhibited. Srivastava (1995) studied the effects of Ayurvedic
adaptogens on psycho-physiological performance of volunteers, up to three months at
an altitude of 4800–6000 m. These herbs improved the physical performance and
sensitivity index of oxygen availability.
   In another experiment, Shetty (1995) studied the Rasayana effect of a herbal pre-
paration consisting of six herbs, by prescribing it 3 g daily for 6 months. Extensive
clinical, biochemical, psychological, and anthropometric assessment, with direct or
indirect bearing on the ageing process, was done initially and at the end of six months.
Analysis of clinical parameters indicated that with the preparation, the diastolic blood
pressure came down within normal limits. Menon et al. (1996) observed that Brahma
Rasayana with more than twenty ingredients, inhibited methylcholanthrene (200µg)
induced sarcoma development. The preparation inhibited carcinogenesis by 80 per
cent and enhanced mouse life. Praveen Kumar et al. (1996) carried out further studies
on the oral administration of four Rasayana preparations. These signiﬁcantly increased
total leucocyte count and bone marrow cellularity. These had natural killer cell activ-
ity and antibody dependent cellular toxicity in mice exposed to gamma radiation. The
effect of Rasayana preparation could be due to increased stem cell proliferation and
also on free radical-induced injury produced by radiation.
   In a review article Dahanukar and Thatte (1997) mentioned that Rasayana pro-
tected animals from infections, shortened recovery time, and lowered mortality rates.
8   What are Rasayana?
They made antibiotics more effective at lower doses. Rasayana worked by enhancing
leucocytosis and by neutrophil destruction. Important immune functions such as
phagocytosis, intracellular killing and macrophage activity also increased in treated
animals.

As an anti-inﬂammatory agent
Pathak et al. (1992) treated osteoarthritis patients, ﬁrst subjecting them to physiother-
apy, for example heating the body systems with massage to cause perspiration, followed
by administration of a polyherbal Rasayana preparation containing Ashwagandha,
Guggulu, etc., with positive results.

References
Dahanukar, S.A., Thatte, U.M. (1997) Current status of Ayurveda in Phytomedicine.
   Phytomedicine, 4, 359–368.
Dwivedi, K.K., Singh, R.H. (1992) A clinical study of Medhya Rasayana therapy in the
   management of convulsive disorders. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 13, 97–106.
Hoffmann, D., The Herbal Handbook. Healing Arts Press, Rochester, Vermont 1998.
Jayaram, S., Walwaikar, P.P., Rajadhyaksha, S.S. (1993) Evaluation of efﬁcacy of a preparation
   containing combination of Indian medicinal plants in patients of generalised weakness.
   Indian Drugs, 30, 498–500.
Kumar, P., Kuttan, R.V., Kuttan, G. (1994) Chemoprotective action of Rasayana against
   cyclophosphamide toxicity. Tumori, 80, 306–308.
Kumar, P., Kuttan, R.V., Kuttan, G. (1996) Radioprotective effects of Rasayanas. International
   Symposium on Radiomodiﬁers in Human Health. Manipal, India. 28–31 December 1995 (Uma
   Devi, P., Bisht, K.S., eds) Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, (1996) 34, 846–850.
Menon, L.G., Kuttan, R., Kuttan, G. (1966) Inhibition of chemical-induced carcinogenesis
   by Rasayana – an indigenous herbal preparation. Journal of Experimental and Clinical Cancer
   Research, 15, 241–243.
Mulgund, S.P., Uchil, D.A. Comparative immunomodulatory and antistress effect of plant
   extracts. Update Ayurveda – 94, Bombay, 24–26th February 1994.
Pandey, K.K.K., Pandey, S.B. (1995) Sedative and tranquilising properties of Medhya drugs –
   a pharmacodynamic concept. Aryavaidyan, 84, 198–200.
Pathak, B., Dwivedi, K.K., Shukla, K.P. (1992) Clinical evaluation of Snehan, Swedana and
   an ayurvedic compound drug in sandhivata vis-a-vis osteoarthritis. Journal of Research and
   Education in Indian Medicine, 11, 27–34.
Puri, H.S. (1970a) Indian medicinal plants used in elixirs and tonics. Quarterly Journal of Crude
   Drug Research, 10, 1555–1566.
Puri, H.S. (1970b) Chavanprasha – an ancient Indian preparation for respiratory diseases.
   Indian Drugs, 7, 15–16.
Puri, H.S. (1971) Vegetable aphrodisiacs of India. Quarterly Journal of Crude Drug Research, 11,
   1742–1748.
Puri, H.S. (1972) Aphrodisiacs in India. Indian Drugs, 9, 11–14.
Shastri, K. Rastrangni by Sharma, Sadanand, (translation of Sanskrit text into Hindi). Motilal
   Banarsi Das, Delhi, India 1979.
Shetty, B.R. Studies on the Rasayana effect of an Ayurvedic compound drug in apparently
   normal aged persons. Seminar on Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, CCRAS. New Delhi, 20–
   22nd March 1995.
Singh, R.H., Murthy, A.R.V. (1989) Medhya Rasayana therapy in the management of apsmara
   vis-à-vis epilepsies. Journal of Research and Education in Indian Medicine, 8, 13–16.
                                                                   What are Rasayana?      9
Srivastava, K.K. (1995) Adaptogens in the high mountains, Indian Journal of Natural Products,
   11, 13–19.
Srivastava, K.K., Grover, S.K., Ramachandran, U.R. (1990) Membrane integrity changes at
   high terrestrial altitudes. Probe, 29, 112–117.
Udupa, K.N. (1973) Psychosomatic stress and Rasayana. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine,
   8, 1–2.
Wagner, H. (1994) Therapy and prevention with immunomodulatory and adaptogenic plant
   drugs. Update – Ayurveda-94, Bombay, 24–26 February 1994.
10   Tridosha

3      Tridosha




The origin of disease in the body, as per Ayurveda, is due to metabolic disturbances in
the various systems. The aim of the Rasayana is to correct this system by balancing vari-
ous ras (extracts which are manifested by a particular taste). Whatever we eat, it has
one or more of the six ras (tastes): sweet, acidic, salty, bitter, astringent and pungent.

Sweet ras
It is mainly in carbohydrates (starch- and sugar-containing substances). It nourishes
sapt dhatus (seven tissue systems in the body), i.e. chyme, blood, liver, ﬂesh, bones,
bone marrow and semen. It is good for ﬁve senses, i.e. eye, ear, nose, tongue and skin.
In excess it causes laziness, obesity, diabetes, and high blood pressure, etc.

Acidic ras
It is mainly present in acidic fruits, except in amalaki (Emblica ofﬁcinalis), yogurt, and
fermented preparations. This ras stimulates saliva, increases the power of digestion,
imparts strength to the body, and keeps the sense organs in order. In excess it causes
hyperacidity and loss of sexual power.

Salty ras
It is mainly present in minerals. It makes food tasty and digestible. Excess of salt
causes thirst, heat, softness of muscles, premature greying of hair, wrinkles, hair loss
and loss of libido.

Bitter ras
The main sources are herbs. It cleans the mouth, increases glandular secretion, digests
food and strengthens all senses. It has an anti-inﬂammatory effect. It helps in skin
diseases, liver functions and obesity. If bitters are taken in excess they cause inﬂamma-
tion, burning sensation and make a man impotent.

Pungent ras
Mainly spices give rise to this ras. Spices do not have a good taste of their own but
make food tasty. They act as antidote to toxins and kill microbes in the food. They
                                                                             Tridosha    11
cause diuresis and help in obesity. Excess of pungent ras, reduces power, energy, and
may cause sedation and hallucination.

Astringent ras
It is mainly in tannin-containing unripe fruits, barks and roots. Astringents are not
good to taste and cause dryness of the body and constipation. Excess of this ras causes
loss of virility, paralysis or other diseases of the nervous system.


RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN RAS AND DOSHA

If a particular ras is deﬁcient or in excess, it disturbs the equilibrium or three dosha of
the body: vata, pitta and kapha. These doshas are sometimes equated with three humours
of Greek: air, bile and phlegm. These control all functions of the human body, i.e. the
biomotor force, metabolic activity and the preservative principles. When all these are
in balance in the body, they are the regenerator but if there is an imbalance in them
then they become the destroyer. There is an action and interaction between these ras
and doshas. Sweet ras suppresses vata; sweet, astringent and pungent tastes suppress
pitta; bitter, astringent and pungent tastes suppress kapha; but if bitter, pungent and
astringent are in excess then vata is corrupted; with acids, salt and bitter in excess pitta
is corrupted while sweet, acid and salt affect kapha. Sweets, acids and salt suppress bad
effects of vata, astringent, sweet and pungent help in pitta, and astringent, bitter and
pungent suppresses kapha. Thus it is clear that a particular ras increases or decreases a
particular dosha. The balanced diet, which keeps the three doshas in order, has no ras in
excess or in short supply.
   In Charak Sanhita it has been stated that no self-inﬂicted disease originates without
disturbance of these doshas. Out of these three doshas, vata dominates pitta. Vata causes
the movement of kapha, the same way air causes movement of clouds in the sky.
If a particular dosha is corrupted it affects a particular system but if two doshas are
involved then the bad effect increases manifold. If both pitta and vata are corrupted
then the effect is like that of high winds on wild ﬁre. This ﬁre can only be controlled
by kapha, which acts as water. If all the three doshas become unstable the result is
disastrous.
   The three doshas are:

Vata
It is equated with vayu or baya or bios of Greek. It is the life or vital force. It
differentiates the cells into different structures, creates blood vessels, lymphatic system
and nerves. Vata in the body becomes corrupted by the use of light, dry, easily
digestible food for a long time, by eating highly nutritious substances with little
roughage, by eating food in small quantities several times a day for long duration,
by consuming excessive cold drinks, excessive work, from stress arising from non-
fulﬁllment of goal, due to worry, grief, panic, fear, excessive sex, sleeping late at night,
and by taking a bath for a long time. All these deplete the vital energy from the body
in the same way as it is lost during ageing. Indigestion and constipation also have
a bad effect on vata. They produce gas and may cause arthritis, muscular pain and
12   Tridosha
headache. If vata remains stable then all the ﬁve senses of the body, body systems
and organs remain stable, otherwise it causes many complications leading to chronic
diseases, and untimely death.

Pitta
It generates and preserves body heat. It manifests itself in various forms in different
biochemical activities mainly concerning digestion and assimilation of food. It brings
about metabolic activity. It is equated with heat or ﬁre. Pitta is situated between the
duodenum and stomach. It digests food by separating ras, chyme, urine, faeces, and
liberates energy for the body. Pitta works in close association with liver and spleen to
produce blood. The bad effects of pitta are due to regular use of hot, spicy, fried, sour,
and salty food, by eating food late in the evening just before sleeping, by remaining
thirsty for a long time, by exposure to heat and sun for a long time, by remaining
irritable and angry. Excess of pitta causes excess body heat, which results in hyperacidity,
haemorrhage, loss of calcium or urinary diseases like incontinence and burning
micturition. It may cause headaches, which result in restlessness, irritation and noise
phobia. If pitta ﬂares up cold, soft, sweet, bitter and astringent substances should be
used but fried, salty, spicy, acidic, non-vegetarian food, alcohol, tobacco, hard work
and sunshine should be avoided.

Kapha
It has a cooling and preservative property, and it acts like the water jacket of the
internal combustion engine. It provides the humidity required by the various systems
of the body particularly, bile, mucous membranes, gastric juices, pancreatic juices and
other systems. A person who has a good diet and good way of living remains free
from the bad effects of kapha. It helps the growth of the body by anabolic activities,
develops strength and vigour in laziness, obesity and thinness of body, and stimulates
the mind, enabling courage, tolerance, and selﬂessness, whilst discouraging greed and
lust. It imparts knowledge to do the good things by intelligence.
   Kapha becomes corrupted by sweet, sour, fatty, and highly nutritious foods which
are hard to digest. It causes diseases which are cold in nature such as the common cold,
cough, bronchial troubles, loss of appetite, insomnia, and laziness. It increases mucus,
saliva, perspiration, and causes loss of virility. To control kapha avoid strong, cold,
humid wind, excess sleep, sex, greediness and lust.
                                                                 Rasayana preparations 13

4      Rasayana preparations




The simplest mode of administering a herb is to take it as it is, to pound it or to use
its juice after ﬁltration. These are the least processed forms and all constituents of the
herb are made available to the body. However fresh herbs are often not readily avail-
able throughout the year. Some fresh herbs not only taste bad but are even nauseating.
The best alternative to fresh herbs is to use properly dried herbs in powder form (churn).
Usually the churn are mixed with salt or sugar to make them more palatable. These
powders are usually administered with a ﬂuid medium, because in a dry form they are
difﬁcult to swallow or sometimes may even choke the respiratory passage. For Rasayana
powders, the common medium for administration is boiled lukewarm cow’s milk,
sweetened with sugar, honey, cow’s ghee or a mixture of both milk and ghee. ( Ghee is
prepared by heating the butter to remove the fat-insoluble, proteinaceous and other
matters and water, so that only fatty acids and the constituents soluble in fat are left.
It is surprising to ﬁnd that though butter has been a common household item in
India since ancient times, it has rarely been used for the administration of Ayurvedic
preparations.)
   The other methods of administration of powdered herbs are infusion, decoction and
distillation. To make an infusion, the herb is immersed in water, usually kept over-
night, ﬁltered and used. In decoction the herb is boiled in water until the water is
reduced to half or so, ﬁltered through a cheese cloth and heated further until the
decoction is reduced to one-fourth. The infusion or decoction may be used in place
of juice, if fresh herbs are not available. For distillation, fresh leaves or ﬂowers, dry root
or seed are boiled in water in a closed container and the steam that arises is condensed,
so that the volatile active constituents of the herb are dispersed in water (aqua).
   Ghansatva are concentrated, sometimes standardized aqueous extracts of the herbs
made from the decoction in the form of a thick paste or dry powder. These are now
preferred by the pharmaceutical industry because they reduce the bulk of the herbs,
and can be easily incorporated into capsules or pills, are easy to formulate, have a
longer shelf life and the end products have good consumer appeal. Sometimes syrups
or alcoholic preparations are made from these extracts.
   The herbal products, in general, have an expiry period of one year but if stored in
airtight containers they may be used for up to two years, whilst the mineral products
may be used indeﬁnitely. The early Ayurvedic physicians were aware that the aqueous
decoctions did not extract all the constituents from the herbs, so they developed
methods to generate alcohol from the solvent during fermentation, in which ethanol
soluble constituents of the herbal mixtures could be dissolved. These preparations are
called Asav and Arishta, to which sweetening agents such as raw sugar, honey and
14   Rasayana preparations
ﬂowers of Woodfordia ﬂoribunda, etc., which can be fermented easily, are initially added.
Due to the alcohol these preparations have a long shelf life, taste good and provide
immediate energy and therapeutic agent to the body. Asava and Arishta differ in their
method of preparation. Arishta are prepared from the decoctions of the herbs, whereas
Asav are made from dry powders. In both cases all the herbs are allowed to ferment in
airtight earthen pitchers for 40–50 days. Before the fermentation of herbal materials it
is ensured that the pots are clean. They are then fumigated with camphor, sandal and
agar wood (Aquillaria agallocha), or with long pepper powder and ghee. The water to be
used should not be alkaline and should be free of inorganic matter. When the period
of fermentation is complete, the solution is ﬁltered and stored in bottles. The fer-
mented end product mainly consists of ethanol, glycerol, lactic acid, acetic acid,
besides other products. This can be used for an indeﬁnite period. In a study of
Draksharishta, it was seen that before fermentation the mixture contained 34.91 per
cent sugar, but after fermentation the product had 19.17 per cent sugar, 8.70 per cent,
alcohol, 0.24 per cent glycerin, 0.21 per cent lactic acid and 1.38 per cent acetic acid.
The pH of the medium changed from 6.40 to 5.00.
   Avleha or lehya (linctus) are semi-solid preparations prepared from dry powders,
decoctions and the pulp of the herbs, along with sugary substances, honey, ghee and/or
oil. During preparation, sugar is boiled in the extract/decoction of the herbs or water,
until thick in consistency. A ﬁne powder of herbs, minerals and spices is then added
to warm thick syrup and stirred so that a homogenous mixture is formed, followed
by ghee or oil when still hot. Honey should be added after cooling the preparation.
Avleha should be dried to such an extent that there is neither too little nor too much
moisture.
   The term Bhasam literally means ash. In practice, in this case, minerals, gems or
hard animal products, after treatment with herbs, are calcined at a very high temperature
to form ash and then this ash-like end product is heated and powdered repeatedly.
When this process has been repeated 100 times, the bhasam is known as Shatputi
(shat is hundred) but after 1,000 times it is known as Sahastraputi (sahastr is thousand).
For each mineral or exoskeleton of animals, different methods are followed. These
products do not degrade during storage and can be used indeﬁnitely.
   Ghrita or Ghritam are preparations made from oil or ghee. These contain fat soluble
constituents. Ghrita are prepared by heating juice, paste, decoction, infusion, etc. of
the herbs in ghee and oil until all the water evaporates. The resulting mass is ﬁltered to
remove fat insoluble materials. The fat is preserved for use as a medicine. Where
vegetable oils alone are used, heating is stopped when froth appears, but when ghee is
used, heating is stopped when the froth subsides. For internal uses these preparations
can be stored for sixteen months after manufacture, but for external use there is no
expiry period.
   Pak are the preparations made from milk, ghee, dry fruits, herbs, minerals and
spices. These preparations are mainly used as nutrients or aphrodisiacs. The usual
method for their preparation is to boil milk until thick and solid. This condensed
milk is fried in ghee and sugar powder or thick sugar syrup, herbs, minerals, chopped
dry fruits and spices, etc. are added to it when warm. The whole mass is made into
chocolate or candy balls of about 25 g each.
   Before use poisonous herbs or minerals are subjected to mitigation called marn
(to kill) or sodhana to purify but it is actually a process to reduce the toxicity so as to
make them available to the body within safe therapeutic doses.
                                                            Rasayana preparations 15
   In this process toxic materials are generally boiled or treated with some herbs or
chemicals in ﬂuids such as cow’s urine, cow dung solution, water, milk, etc. After
treatment the herb/mineral is dried and processed further before use.
   In India, cane sugar juice is used for making raw sugar (brownish in colour) and for
sugar manufactured by western technology. In addition to these, an indigenous method
of reﬁning sugar has been used for a very long time. The end product, called Mishri,
consists of lumps of transparent, bold crystals. This sugar candy is considered to have
a cooling effect and is used in auspicious ceremonies and in Ayurvedic medicaments
as a sweetening agent. In the present book, the term sugar candy has been used for
Mishri, to differentiate it from other forms of sugar.
   In Ayurveda ﬁve types of salts are recognised. Out of these a man-made preparation
called black salt is considered a good carminative and is included in many formulations
for digestive problems. It is prepared by fusing saltpetre (nitre), Terminalia chebula,
and common salt. In the presence of organic matter at high temperatures the salt turns
into a deep violet amorphous mass.
16   Aak

5      Aak




     Calotropis procera (Ait.) R.Br.
     C. gigantea (L.) R. Br. ex Ait.
     Family: Asclepiadaceae


THE PLANTS AND THEIR DISTRIBUTION

Both Calotropis species are common, wild, latex-containing shrubs, growing on waste-
land in the arid zones of India. The plants are characterized by thick leathery leaves,
with white incrustation. In C. procera (Fig. 1A) leaves are 5.5 to 15 cm long and
4 to 8 cm broad, ovate or oblong with acuminate apex. In C. gigantea (Fig. 1B)
the leaves are 10–20 cm long and 8–10 cm broad, obovate to oblong with a cordate
base. Flowers are white or pink in colour. The fruit is a follicle and seed is with
pappus.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

In Ayurveda, two types of aak have been recognised, one with white ﬂower (C. procera)
and the other with red ﬂower (C. gigantea). Root (Fig. 1C), latex, and the ﬂower of
both species are used in medicine. These herbs are said to have a strong mercury-like
action on the human body, so these plants are often referred to as vegetable mercury.
   The root bark occurs in irregular short pieces, slightly quilled or curved, externally
greyish yellow, soft and spongy, internally yellowish white. The taste is acrid and
bitter.
   Root bark is alterative, tonic, antispasmodic, expectorant, and in large doses an
emetic. It has a Digitalis-like effect on the heart. It is used as a substitute of ipecacuanha
for inducing vomit. It also helps in dysentery. It increases glandular secretion, espe-
cially bile. For syphilis, it is smoked like tobacco. It is used as an antimicrobial agent
and is said to be as effective as mercurial preparations. The latex is applied externally
for chronic skin diseases such as leprosy and eczema.

Ayurvedic preparation
An aphrodisiac is prepared by pulverising a mixture of 125 dry ﬂowers and 12 g each
of clove, nutmeg, mace, and Anacyclus pyrethrum root. To use, 500 mg of this prepara-
tion is stirred in milk and administered three times a day (Nadkarni, 1954).
                                                                              Aak    17




Figure 1 Calotropis procera: A branch, C dry root, B C. gigantea branch.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

In diarrhoea and dysentery
The root bark powder, within the ﬁrst day of the treatment of diarrhoea, changed the
faecal matter into a semi-solid mass. In dysentery cases, mucus and tenesmus were
relieved. The bark was not effective when dysentery was accompanied by blood ( Jain
et al. 1985).

In migraine headaches
In the morning, before sunrise, tender leaves were given in a capsule with water on an
empty stomach. After treatment for three days, all patients suffering from migraine
headaches got relief (Prasad, 1987).

Hepatoprotective effect
Basu et al. (1992) tried chloroform root extract of C. procera in experimentally-induced
acute and chronic liver injury by carbon tetrachloride.
18   Aak
In inﬂammations
A single dose of the aqueous suspension of the dried latex was effective to a signiﬁcant
level against the acute inﬂammatory response (Kumar and Basu, 1994).

In bronchial asthma
Sharma and Sharma (1992) tried powders of both C. procera and C. gigantea on 75
patients of bronchial asthma, and observed good results. In another experiment, equal
quantities of C. gigantea, Piper nigrum and P. betle leaf juice were made into pills of 200
mg each. They were quite effective in the cases of asthma (Thirunavukkarasu, 1995).

Cytotoxic effect (anticancerous property)
On the basis of Ayurvedic principles, out of 500 plants, Smit et al. (1995) selected
forty four plants, which were supposed to have anticancerous properties. Of these
fourteen plants out were investigated for cytotoxicity on human colorectal carcinoma
cell line. Extracts of C. procera ﬂowers displayed the strongest cytotoxic activity.

Chemical studies
The herb juice is reported to contain calactin, calotropin, calotoxin and uscharidin, all
of which are poisonous in nature (Chouhan et al. 1992). In latex, a powerful bacteriolytic
enzyme, a very toxic glycoside calactin and a non-toxic proteolytic enzyme calotropin
have been identiﬁed. It is more proteolytic than papain and bromelain (Himalaya Drug
Co-Herbal database).

Toxicological studies
The accidental instillation of herb juice of both C. procera and C. gigantea resulted in
local poisoning (Chouhan et al. 1992). In higher doses, root bark caused nausea, vomiting
and diarrhoea, headache, burning micturition, and leucorrhea. The toxic constituents
of latex had a caustic effect on mucous membranes and tender skin. It increased heart
beat and respiration, leading to distress and death. Calotropin, a compound in latex, is
more toxic than strychnine (Himalaya Drug Co. – Herbal database).

References
Basu, A., Sen, T., Ray, R.N., Nag Chaudhuri, A.K. (1992) Hepatoprotective effects of
   Calotropis procera root extract on experimental liver damage in animals. Fitoterapia, 63,
   507–514.
Chouhan, B.S., Gupta, I.L.A., Rathore, G.S., Mathur, C.B. (1992) Calotropis injury to eye. Afro
   Asian Journal of Ophthalmology, 10, 124–125.
Jain, P.K., Kumar, N. Verma, R. (1985) Clinical trials of Arka Mula Tvaka, bark of Calotropis
   procera, Ait (R.Br.) on Atisar and Pravihika – a preliminary study. Journal of Research in
   Ayurveda and Siddha, 6, 89–91.
Kumar, V.I., Basu, N. (1994) Antiinﬂammatory activity of the latex of Calotropis procera.
   Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 44, 123–125.
Nadkarni, K.M. Indian Materia Medica, Vol. I. Popular Prakashan, Bombay, India 1954.
                                                                                      Aak     19
Prasad, G. (1985) Action of Calotropis procera on migraine (Family Asclepiadaceae). Journal of
  National Integrated Medical Association, 27, 7–10.
Sharma, P.P., Sharma, J.M. Therapeutic evaluation of Calotropis spp. in the management
  of bronchial asthma: a clinical study. International Seminar of Traditional Medicine, Calcutta,
  7–9 November 1992.
Smit, H.F., Woerdenbag, H.J., Singh, R.H., Meulenbeld, G.J., Labadie, R.P., Zwaving, J.H.
  (1995) Ayurvedic herbal drugs with possible cytostatic activity. Journal of Ethnopharmacology,
  47, 75–84.
Thirunavukkarasu, S. (1995) A clinical evaluation of Siddha herbal drugs for bronchial asthma:
  Eraippu Noi. International Seminar on Recent Trends in Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ootacamund,
  India. 18–20 February 1995.
20   Akrakara

6      Akrakara




     Anacyclus pyrethrum DC
     Syn: A. pyrethrum (L.) Lagsca
     Family: Asteraceae (Compositae)

The English name of this root is pellitory. In Germany, A. ofﬁcinarum, also known as
A. pyrethrum or Pyrethrum germanicum was used earlier.


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

The plant does not grow in India, and is imported mainly from Spain, Algeria,
Morocco and other Mediterranean countries. It is commonly adulterated with other
roots of similar shape. It is a perennial plant, the stems of which in the earlier stages
lie prostate on the ground before arising erect. The leaves are smooth, alternate and
pinnate with deeply cut segments. Each stem bears one large ﬂower head; the disk
ﬂowers are yellow and ray ﬂowers white, tinged with purple beneath.
   The root is slightly twisted, cylindrical, tapering brownish to greyish brown in
colour, wrinkled, about 0.5 cm thick, with a tuft of grey hairs and bright black spots.
The fracture is short and horny. The cut surface is pale white in colour and shows a
radiate structure in the centre, with many oleoresin glands in the bark. The root has
slight odour, taste is pungent with a tingling sensation.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

Earlier, it was used in Europe for relieving toothache and in promoting free ﬂow of
saliva in cases of mouth and throat dryness. A gargle of the infusion was prescribed for
relaxing mouth muscles and in partial paralysis of the tongue. Patients seeking relief
from rheumatic or neuralgic affections of the head and face were advised to chew the
root daily for several months. It was supposed to purge the brain (cerebral stimulant)
and thus help in epilepsy, gout, sciatica and in lethargy (ﬁbromyalgia).
   In India, because of its powerful irritant nature, it is considered a stimulant for the
nervous system and is included in the preparations used as a sex stimulant. It is also an
ingredient in recipes for paralysis, hemiplegia, chorea and rheumatism.
   In Unani system of medicine, a decoction obtained by boiling in 100 ml of water,
a mixture of Anancyclus pyrethrum 2 g, ginger 1 g, liquorice 2 g is prescribed for 30–
45 days in facial palsy.
                                                                       Akrakara    21
Ayurvedic preparation

Akrakaradi Vati

Method Mix ﬁne powders of akrakara 1 part, ginger (dry) 1 part, Piper cubeba 1 part,
saffron 1 part, long pepper 1 part, nutmeg 1 part, clove 1 part, sandalwood 1 part,
opium 4 parts, and make pills of 125 g each.

Uses To delay the time of ejaculation during sexual intercourse.

Chemical studies
The root has resin, inulin, some inorganic compound and an active principle pyrethrin.
22   Amalaki

7      Amalaki




     Phyllanthus emblica L.
     Syn: Emblica ofﬁcinalis Gaertn
     Family: Euphorbiaceae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

The tree grows wild in the deciduous the forests of the Indian subcontinent and along
the foothills of the Himalayas. It ﬂowers in March to May and the fruit ripens in
the cold season. Leaves are feathery, with small, oblong, pinnately arranged leaﬂets
(Fig. 2A). The fruits are depressed globes (Fig. 2B). The fruit of the wild variety is the
smallest, 2–2.5 cm in diameter and 7–10 g in weight. This fruit has more ﬁbres, is
astringent and is more acidic in taste. Amla is often cultivated and two horticultural
varieties Biju and Kalmi are well known. In Biju variety the fruits are ﬂeshy globes,
2.5–3.6 cm in diameter weighing 10–15 g. The Kalmi variety has the biggest fruit,
which may grow up to 5 cm in size. The fresh fruit is waxy and when ripe its pale
yellow colour is often tinged with pink. The dry fruit (Fig. 2C) is smaller in size, sub-
hexagonal and wrinkled. The colour varies from greyish black to yellowish brown,
depending on the stage of ripening when it is harvested. The dry fruit separates easily
into six parts and on applying pressure releases trigonous seed. Sometimes the com-
mercial samples of the fruit are waxy brownish. These are obtained by drying the
boiled fruit. By boiling, the contents of the fruits gelatinize, resulting in a waxy pulp.
   Morton (1957) has given an account of this tree.
   In Ayurveda, the various characteristics of the fruit described are: Shreephala – fruit
of prosperity, Shiva – auspicious, nectar, Divyadhara – the basis of divine quality,
Sayastha – arrests old age, Dhatri – mother like, sustains the life, Vrishya – invigorat-
ing, Shitphal – fruit cooling in effect.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

According to Ayurveda, amalaki is sour but not acidic like other fruits. It is astringent
but sweet. On tasting the fruit, it is initially sour, but sometimes with a sweet
aftertaste, which becomes more apparent if water is drunk afterwards.
   The common uses of the fruit are:
                                                                            Amalaki    23




    Figure 2 Phyllanthus emblica A leaves, B fresh fruit, C dry fruit.




As a Rasayana
Amalaki is considered best among Rasayana so called Acharasayana. It clears all the
three doshas present in the human body. A regular use of amalaki is presumed to
prolong lifespans, up to 120 years for humans. Its use not only increases human life
but also improves the quality. It imparts memory, balanced intellect, health, youth-
fulness, lustrous body and a clear voice. It helps reduce tendencies for headaches,
confusion of thought, psychic disorders and memory loss. Amla, when administered
with ghee, honey and oil for one month, is a geriatric tonic for general debility, lack of
disease resistance and memory loss. It overcomes the degenerative effects of old age. In
winter, when vitality is low, amla with ashwagandha, ghee and honey is restorative and
invigorating.
24   Amalaki
In stomach troubles
A decoction of the fruit is useful in dyspepsia, chronic dysentery and diarrhea. It is
cooling and a refrigerant, diuretic and laxative. A sherbet of the fruit made with
lemon juice helps acute dysentery, constipation, piles, enlarged liver and dropsy.

As an expectorant
It is a stimulant and expectorant in chronic bronchitis.

In diabetes
It is used for sugar control in diabetes. A tablespoon of the juice with a cup of bitter
gourd (Momordica charantia) juice, or with equal quantities of powder of seed kernel of
Syzgium cumini, taken daily for two months stimulates the pancreas and causes insulin
secretion.

In eye diseases
The eyes should be washed with a solution of amla juice. The juice is administered
internally with honey. It is said to restore eyesight and reduce intraocular tension.

As a hair tonic
As a hair tonic, for hair growth and pigmentation, hair is washed with an infusion
prepared by soaking amla overnight in water. For detergency, soap pod (Acacia concinna)
and soap nut (Sapindus mukorossi) may be added to amla before soaking. A hair oil is
prepared by boiling a decoction or juice of amla in the sesame oil until all water from
the mixture evaporates. While preparing this medicated oil, Centella asiatica, Eclipta
alba and some aromatic herbs may be used along with it.

Household preparations
Amla is a household remedy in many parts of India and may be used as follows:

Powder
The ﬁne powder of the fruit is administered as such, or with water or milk.

Decoction
The powder in the form of decoction and may be administered as such, or used as a
washing agent as detailed above.

Poultice
The coarse powder is heated with water and applied to wounds or swellings.
                                                                          Amalaki    25
Medicated hair oil
As detailed above under hair tonic.

Medicated ghee
The juice or decoction of amalaki is boiled along with other herbs in butter oil (ghee)
until all the water evaporates.

Preserve
The big Kalami Amla (horticultural variety) fruit is stored in saline water for a couple
of days, washed, pierced with stainless steel needles and stored in a glass pot with
alternate layers of sugar and fruit. After a few days the sugar (which turns into syrup)
is separated from the fruits, heated until thick and poured back on the fruits. After
many days the sugar inﬁltrates the fruit, which becomes soft and loses much of
its astringency and sourness. This preserve is often administered with silver foil
for headaches, as a nervous tonic. While making the preserve, precautions are taken
to prevent iron objects from touching the amalaki fruits as these turn the preserve
black.

Compound Ayurvedic preparations
Amla is an ingredient of a large number of Ayurvedic preparations. The important
ones, in which amla is the main ingredient are: Amalaki Rasayana, Triphala, and
Chavanprasha. Keeping in view the importance and popularity of these products, a
detailed account of these is given after the therapeutic and pharmacology studies on
amla.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Bordi et al. (1985) have written a article on the juice of this fruit.

As an anabolic agent
It raised the total protein level and increased the body weight. Clinical research has
shown the positive effects of this fruit on the body, which include enhanced cellular
regeneration, increased lean body mass, enhanced production and secretion of inter-
feron and corticosteroids. Amla preparation caused a signiﬁcant increase in body weight.
Nitrogen balance studies also showed that it has an anabolic effect (Singh and Guru,
1975, Tewari et al. 1968).

Antiemetic
This effect was observed by Yaqueenuddin et al. (1990).
26   Amalaki
Antioxidant effect
Experiments conducted at Niwa Institute of Immunology in Japan have shown it to
be a potent scavenger of free radicals as it has a high level of superoxide dimutase
(SOD) activity (Treadway, 1988). Earlier it was considered that the fruit’s antioxidant
activity was due to ascorbic acid, but work done by Thresiamma et al. (1996) and
Ghoshal et al. (1996) indicated that it is due to ellagic acid and four hydrolyzable
tannins.

As an antidiarrhoeal
The antidiarrhoeal activity is generally attributed to the astringent action of tannins in
the fruit on the mucosal proteins, resulting in the formation of a protective layer and
thus the arresting of intestinal inﬂammation.

As an antimicrobial
It has antiviral, antibacterial and antifungal activity. When Amla was studied
for inhibitory effects on human immunodeﬁciency virus-1 reverse transcriptase,
it exhibited signiﬁcant activity. Bioassay-guided studies indicated that putranji-
vain A and four other compounds are potent inhibitory substances (El-Mekkawy,
1995).

Antimutagenic effect
It protected Salmonella typhimurium against nitro-o-phenylenediamine-induced mutag-
ensis (Grover and Simran Kaur, 1989).

As an immunomodulator
Amla has been found to enhance natural killer cell activity and antibody-dependent
cellular cytotoxicity. It elicited a twofold increase in spleen NK cell activity on third
day of tumour inoculation, which became highly signiﬁcant later on. It increased the
lifespan of tumour-bearing rats by 35 per cent. The anti-tumour property is due to
cell mediated toxicity (Suresh and Vasudevan, 1994).

As a cytoprotectant
When animals fed with lead and aluminium salts were given aqueous extract of amla,
histopathological studies revealed that amla could prevent the cytotoxicity of metals
more successfully than vitamin C (Roy et al. 1991). Crude amla extract before admin-
istration of cesium chloride reduced the clastogenic effect of the compound in vivo on
mouse bone marrow. It reduced the frequency of chromosomal aberrations (Ghosh
et al. 1993). Gulati et al. (1995) observed that 50 per cent alcohol extract and quer-
cetin isolated from alcohol extract showed signiﬁcant hepatoprotection against alcohol
and paracetamol in rats. Ellagic acid from amla afforded protection against radiation-
induced toxicity (Thresiamma et al. 1996).
                                                                            Amalaki     27
As a nutritive tonic
Earlier the therapeutic efﬁcacy of the amla was considered to be due to the presence of
vitamin C in the fruit (Siddique and Ahmed, 1985). It was observed that one fruit of
amla contained vitamin C equivalent to nine oranges. Recent studies also conﬁrmed
that bioavailability of vitamin C from amla fruit is better than that from the synthetic
ascorbic acid, probably due to the presence of some accessory factors in the fruit. Roy
et al. (1987) observed that 10 ml of Amla syrup, containing 8.7 mg of vitamin C was
as effective as 100 mg of synthetic vitamin C. It is one of the fruits containing
chromium and some of the beneﬁcial effects of it may be due to this element ( Janjua,
1991). Amla preparations showed good effects in generalised weakness ( Jayaram et al.
1993).

In acne vulgaris
When Sunder vati (consisting of Holarrhena pubescens, Emblica ofﬁcinalis, Embelia ribes
and Zingiber ofﬁcinale) was studied in a double blind randomized placebo-controlled
clinical evaluation, a signiﬁcant reduction in lesions was indicated (Pranjpe and Kulkarni,
1995).

In heart problems
The effect of alcoholic extract of amla was studied on myocardial necrosis. It increased
the cardiac glycogen level signiﬁcantly with marked changes in serum-free fatty acids
levels. Serum glutamic oxaloacetic transminase (SGOT), serum glutamic pyuruvate
transminase (SGPT), and serum lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) were signiﬁcantly less in
the group treated with this fruit (Tariq et al. 1977).

In hyperacidity
Cases of hyperchlorhydria with burning sensation in the abdomen, cardiac and gastric
regions beneﬁted from application of the fruit powder. A decoction prepared by taking
5 g amla in 80 ml of water (reduced to 20 ml) was given after main meals to patients.
There was signiﬁcant relief in symptoms after 30 days (Tripathi et al. 1992). When
water extract of amla was administered to patients of hyperhidrosis, excellent results
were achieved in 29 of 40 cases (Zachariah, 1984).

In hypercholesterolaemia
In a trial, when 15 g of fresh amla was taken daily for four weeks, it reduced choles-
terol by 21 per cent. Feeding amla to hypercholesterolaemic rabbits for 12 weeks
increased lipid mobilization, catabolism and retardation of lipid deposition in the
extra hepatic tissues. The lipid level in the aorta increased but it was much less
compared with the control (Mand et al. 1991). Amla reduced serum cholesterol levels
signiﬁcantly and had an antiatherogenic effect. It was conﬁrmed that this effect of amla
is due to a group of compounds and not vitamin C alone (Thakur and Mandal, 1984).
Mathur et al. (1996) studied the hypolipidaemic effect of fruit juice in cholesterol-fed
28   Amalaki
rabbits and an antiatherosclerotic effect was observed. It lowered serum cholesterol,
triglyceride, phospholipid and LDL value by 82 per cent, 66 per cent, 77 per cent, and
90 per cent respectively. Rabbits treated with amla juice excreted more cholesterol and
phospholipids, suggesting that the juice changed the mode by which these compounds
are absorbed.

In leucorrhoea
A one g dose of equal quantities of amla and guggal with honey, three times a day was
effective in leucorrhoea (Seshagiri Rao et al. 1985). Triphala, when used, was also
effective (Singh and Londhe, 1993).

In ulcers
When the patients of duodenal ulcer and non-ulcer dyspepsia, were administered
amla, they showed improvements, with a signiﬁcant drop in acid and pepsin secretion
(Varma et al. 1977, Chawla et al. 1982). Complete radiological recovery was reported
in the peptic ulcer patients. Amla exhibited prophylactic affect against histamine-
induced ulcers in albino rats (Singh and Singh, 1985). Intraperitoneal administration
of ellagic acid from amla, in a 5 mg/kg dose, markedly reduced the occurrence of
gastric lesion and acid secretion-induced stress (Murakami et al. 1991). Pakrashi and
Bandyopadhyaya (1996–1997) have also studied the effects of amla extract on peptic
ulcers.


AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS

1 Triphala
This Rasayana is made by pulverizing a mixture of dry fruits of P. emblica, Terminalia
bellirica and T. chebula. Different opinions exist about the proportion of each fruit in
the formulation of Triphala. The various views are as follows:

1    One part each of the three fruits, by weight.
2    One part T. chebula, two parts T. bellirica and three parts P. emblica, by weight.
3    One part T. chebula, two parts T. bellirica and four parts P. emblica, by weight.
4    One fruit of T. chebula, two of T. bellirica and four fruits of P. emblica, by number.
     (This does not appear appropriate as the weight of individual fruit on the same
     tree varies and the resultant product based on the number of fruits cannot be of
     uniform quality).

Uses in Ayurveda
Triphala is one of the most widely used Ayurvedic preparations and a household name
in India. It is a ﬁne combination of three Rasayana fruits, which interact and potentiate
each other. As with the Ayurvedic concept, it destroys kapha and pitta. It is a laxative,
digestive, carminative, good for eyes and gives relief in diabetes, leprosy and in chronic
fevers. The other major uses of Triphala are:
                                                                          Amalaki    29
For arthritis
Boil 10 g Triphala in 200 ml of water until reduced to one-fourth and add one
teaspoon of honey to this decoction. Drink this decoction twice daily, in the morning
and evening. It is an anti-inﬂammatory agent and induces sleep.

As a blood puriﬁer
For healthy skin and in diabetes, take 3 g Triphala, 3 g turmeric, and 6 g sugar. Drink
this mixture with water for 60 days.

For chronic headaches
Take 30 g of Triphala and 10 g each of Swertia spp., turmeric, Azadirachta indica bark
and Tinospora spp. Make a ﬁne homogenous mixture. Take 10 g of this powder and
boil it in 800 ml of water until reduced to 200 ml, strain and drink along with 10 g
of Commiphora wightii gum.

In convalescence
Mix equal quantities of ﬁne powders of Triphala, Withania somnifera, Glycyrrhiza glabra
and Asparagus racemosus. The dose is 3 g with honey, before meals for 30– 40 days.

For improving eyesight and coughs
Make an infusion of 10 g Triphala in 400 ml of water and keep overnight. In the
morning ﬁlter the infusion and wash the eyes with it (it may cause irritation to eyes).
Internally, take 10 g Triphala with one teaspoon of ghee.

For obesity
Regularly drink two teaspoons of honey with one teaspoon of Triphala and a glass of
cold water.

For oral hygiene
As a tooth powder for dental cavities, spongy, bleeding gums and malodour, etc.,
make a ﬁne powder by mixing Triphala, Acacia bark and Butea gum 50 g each, ginger
and black pepper 10 g each, dehydrated alum (alum is heated to remove water until it
swells), common salt, turmeric, Cyperus scariosus, Embelia ribes, Azadirachta leaves and
Quercus gall (20 g each). Pass the powder through a sieve of 100 mesh or so, so that
there are no coarse or gritty particles. Massage this powder on the gum, not on the
teeth. Let the powder remain there for about 20 minutes. If there is an excess of saliva
in the mouth, it should be spat out but water for gargling should not be used during
the duration of treatment. The mouth may be rinsed afterwards.
   (Note: this powder contains quite a number of astringent substances, some of
them very rich in tannins, so the mouth may become very dry after its use in some
cases.)
30   Amalaki
For premature grey hairs
Drink a mixture of two teaspoons of honey, half a teaspoon ghee and one teaspoon of
Triphala ﬁrst thing in the morning, when stomach is empty.

For stomach troubles

For indigestion A mixture of ﬁne powders of Triphala 10 g, black salt 1 g, divided
into three doses, is used three times a day.

As a laxative Boil 20 g Triphala in 400 ml of water until reduced to 100 ml. Add
10–20 ml of castor oil and drink before retiring. It is a very good colon cleanser.

For ﬂatulence Mix ﬁne powders of Triphala 15 g, raw sugar 10 g, ginger 5 g, and take
a dose of 5 g twice daily.

For loose motions with mucus a) Take 3 g Triphala with honey or b) a mixture of
equal parts of Triphala, Cyperus scariosus, Aconitum heterophyllum. Dose 3 g twice daily.
Avoid fried, spicy and hard-to-digest food items. (Note: A. heterophyllum is a non-
poisonous aconite, bitter in taste. It does not contain the toxic aconitine group of
alkaloids and is safe even for infants, to whom it is often prescribed as an antidote to
poisons.)

Compound preparations of Triphala

Sooksham Triphala
Ingredients: T. bellirica, T. chebula, P. emblica 66.7 g each and Kajjali 10 g (made by
triturating mercury 5 g, and sulphur 5 g). Sooksham Triphala is used for the same
purposes as Triphala but Kajjali is said to enhance its effect.

Mahatriphaladi Ghrit

Method Triphala powder 500 g, and 500 ml juice of each of Eclipta, Adhatoda vasica,
P. emblica, Fumaria indica, Tinospora, goat milk 500 ml, ghee 500 g. Separately take
15 g each of long pepper, sugar, black grapes, blue lotus ﬂowers, Triphala, liquorice,
Withania, Tinospora, and Solanum surattensis (S. xanthocarpum).
   Boil Triphala (500 g) in 4 litres of water until reduced to half a litre. Filter it and
add to it 15 g powder of each of nine herbs. Mix this decoction in ghee followed by
juices and milk. Heat the whole mass until all the water evaporates and only fatty
matter is left.

Dose 5–10 g (1–2 teaspoons) twice daily with milk, sweetened with sugar.

Indications Cleans the eye, restores eyesight, prevents formation of cataract and saves
eyes from all types of diseases. It is alleged that regular use of this compound for 5–6
months can improve eyesight to such an extent that glasses may not be required.
                                                                                Amalaki     31
Phalghrit

Method Take ten g each of liquorice, T. bellirica, T. chebula, P. emblica, Saussurea lappa,
turmeric, Berberis spp., Picrorhiza kurroa, Embelia ribes, Piper longum, Cyperus scariosus,
Citrullus colocynthis root, Withania somnifera, Acorus calamus, Hemidesmus indicus, Cryptolepis
buchanani, Callicarpa macrophylla, fennel, asafoetida (fried), Alpinia galanga, Santalum
album, Pterocarpus santalinus, jasmine ﬂower, lotus ﬂowers, bamboo manna (silica),
celery, Baliospermum montanum and sugar along with 600 g ghee, 250 ml cow’s milk and
250 ml water.
   Make a paste from the coarse powders of all the herbs with water and ghee, add milk
and the remaining water. Heat until all the water evaporates. Strain the fatty matter
through muslin cloth and preserve.

Dose 5–10 g in the morning.
  Indications: It exerts beneﬁcial effects on the sexual system of both males and
females. It is particularly useful in infertility and threatened miscarriage. Couples
desirous of a child should start this medication months before conception and the
expectant mother should continue this during pregnancy. This treatment facilitates
normal delivery and a healthy child.

Therapeutic indications and pharmacological studies on Triphala preparations

Anthelmintic activity
Gaind et al. (1964) noted this activity.

As an anti-oxidant
Vani et al. (1997) observed radical scavenging properties in Triphala extract. It was
effective in preventing superoxide-induced haemolysis of red blood cells. The extract
also prevented lipid peroxidation in rat liver mitochondria.

Anti-inﬂammatory, analgesic and antipyretic property
Ghosh et al. (1989) observed these activities in Triphala. Doiphode (1993) prescribed
Sooksham Triphala to 73 patients suffering from fevers, headaches, body aches and
coughs. Out of these 49 patients showed signs of improvement.

As an antidiabetic
Triphala (90 mg/kg orally) had a signiﬁcant hypoglycaemic activity in fasting rats
(Ghosh et al., 1990).

In obesity
For weight loss, Pranjape et al. (1990) prescribed 250 mg Triphala guggal, three times
daily with lukewarm water before meals for three months. Kulkarni (1995a, b, c) used
Sooksham Triphala in obesity and observed a signiﬁcant weight loss with reductions in
32   Amalaki
skin-fold thickness, hip and waist circumference, serum cholesterol and triglyceride
levels. It was moderately useful in lipoma.

In leucorrhoea
Triphala decoction yielded good results, when given to the patients with symptoms of
leucorrhoea (Singh and Londhe, 1993).

2 Amalaki Rasayana I

Method Cut transversely into two pieces, one big and one small, the stem of mature
Butea tree. From one side of the bigger stem piece, scoop out wood to form a container-
like structure. With the smaller piece make a lid. Fill the container with fresh green amla
fruit and seal it with the lid. The whole assembly is covered on the outside with the
coarse cloth and plastered with wet clay about 2.5 cm thick. Heat the container in
slow burning cow dung cakes, remove it from the ﬁre after 2–3 hours and take out
the cooked fruits. Macerate these fruits by hand to remove the stones and ﬁbres from
the pulp. To this pulp add equal quantities of ghee and one and a half times as much
honey to form a paste.

Dose Before administering this preparation, Panchkarma is required and the patient is
conﬁned to a hut for one month. Water and food should not be used, only giving
cow’s milk 2–3 times a day. The initial dose of this Rasayana is 50 g, which may be
increased up to 200 g, depending on the digestive power of the patient.

Indications The above treatment is said to rejuvenate all body systems with increased
mental power, resistance and immunity. It is alleged to transform old men into young,
with new hair and teeth, and induce physical power like that of an elephant.

3 Amalaki Rasayana II
It is a simpler form of the above Amalaki Rasayana. It is prepared by blanching the
fresh fruit for ﬁve minutes in boiling water. When soft, stones and ﬁbres are removed
and the pulp of the fruit is dried in the sun. Add amla juice to this pulp, macerate and
dry. This process is repeated daily for 21 days. On the 22nd day store the completely
dry powder in an airtight container.
   Dose: 2 g in the morning on an empty stomach with honey or with cold milk and
honey. Do not use hot milk with honey.

Amalaki Rasayana imparts positive nitrogen balance to the body. It is digestive,
laxative and diuretic (Singh and Guru, 1975).

4 Chavanprasha
It is also spelt as Cyavanaprasa, Chyavanprasha.
   According to a legend in Rigveda, the sage Chavan got the formulation of this
supreme Rasayana for rejuvenation and longevity from the twin divine physicians
                                                                            Amalaki   33
Ashwini Kumars and by using the formulation Chavan became young again. For the
beneﬁt of mankind he widely disseminated the knowledge about this preparation.
People in ancient India called it Chavanprasha Avleh ( prasha means diet, and avleh is
linctus), so its meaning is “the dietary linctus as revealed by Chavan”.
   Due to the aggressive publicity of the commercial section, Chavanprasha has become
so popular in India that it accounts for one-third of the total sales of all Ayurvedic
products. It has been introduced in the western world with great success.
   According to Ayurveda, as a dietary supplement it strengthens the organs under the
ribs. It is very effective in the convalescence of weak individuals, children and old
people suffering from coughs, colds, urinogenital problems and in all disturbances of
vata, pitta and virya (vital ﬂuid). It makes the body strong and lustrous, sharpens the
memory, contributing to a happy mind. The dose is 10–15 g in the morning and before
retiring in the evening. The dose can be increased or decreased as per the digestive
power of the patient.

Formulation of Chavanprasha
The formulation of Chavanprasha consists of two groups of herbs, Ashtvarga (eight
herbs) and Dashmul (ten roots), in addition to many other ingredients.

Ashtavarga
The plants of the Ashtvarga group became rare or extinct about 500 years ago.
The renowned author Bhavamisra (c1500–1600AD) suggested substitutes in his book
Bhavaprakasa Nighantu, as referenced by Chunekar and Pandey (1969). Bhavamisra
said, “What to say to common men is that as the herbs of Ashtvarga are not available
to kings even so the learned physicians should substitute the herbs of Ashtvarga by the
other herbs of the same physiological activity.” Bhavamisra suggested the following
substitutes for various members of Ashtavarga:


  For   Meda, Mahameda:              Asparagus racemosus
  For   Jeevak and Rishbhak:         Pueraria tuberosa
  For   Kakoli and Ksheer Kakaoli:   Withania somnifera
  For   Ridhi and Vridhi:            Dioscorea bulbifera, or Tacca aspera tubers.


  Some other Ayurvedic experts did not agree with these substitutes and they sug-
gested the following herbs:


  In   place   of   Jivak:      Tinospora spp. or Centaurea behen
  In   place   of   Rishbhak:   Orchis spp., or bamboo manna, or Salvia haematode
  In   place   of   Meda:       Orchis mascula
  In   place   of   Mahameda:   Paederia foetida, Asparagus adscendens
  In   place   of   Kakoli:     Curculigo orchioides
34     Amalaki

     In place of Ksheer Kakaoli:   Chlorophytum arundinaceum or the other members of
                                   white Musli
     In place of Riddhi:           Sida spp. herb or seed
     In place of Vridhi:           Orchis latifolia or Sida rhomboidea


   Recent research workers, after extensive ethnobotanical surveys of the Himalayas,
from where Ashtavarga was probably collected, have identiﬁed the various members as
follows:


     Ridhi Vridhi:         Habenaria interemedia D. Don
     Jivak:                Microstylis spp.
     Rishbhak:             Microstylis wallichii Lindl.
     Kakoli:               Fritellaria oxypetala Royle
     Kshirkakaoli:         Lilium polyphyllum
     Meda, Mahameda:       Polygonatum verticillatum Moench.


Dashmul
These ten plants are further divided into two groups: laghu (herb) and Vrihta (tree
shrub).

Laghu This consists of Desmodium gangeticum, Uraria picta, Solanum indicum, S.
xanthocarpum, and Tribulus terrestris. These herbs grow mainly in the wild areas and
are handcrafted, which is tedious and uneconomical, so it is common practice to
use the whole herb with an admixture of adjoining ﬂora in place of genuine herb
roots.

Vrihat This includes Oroxylum indicum, Aegle marmelos, Gmelina arboreum, Clerodendrum
phlomoides, and Stereospermum suvaleons. The Ayurvedic texts mention the use of these
plants’ root bark but in these cases stem bark is used instead.
   Recent studies on Dashmula by Gupta et al. (1983, 1984) have shown that its
decoction produced aspirin-like antipyretic and anti-inﬂammatory effects. It reduced
the spontaneous motor activity. It potentiated the pentobarbitone hypnosis and an-
tagonized the amphetamine-induced hyperactivity. It also exhibited tranquilizing,
sedative activity. The above research justiﬁed the use of Dashmula in pains, backache,
gout, sciatica, pyrexia, inﬂammation and oedema.

Composition of Chavanprasha
The composition of this product varies from place to place and from person to person.
The various manufacturers, on the basis of their experience, substitute the herbs with
some other herbs/materials or fortify the preparation with minerals, animal products,
                                                                         Amalaki    35
etc. The number of formulations is so large that enumeration of the majority of these
will be beyond this book’s scope. For present purposes, as an example, a comparative
study of various ingredients in Charak Sanhita, Puri (1970), Alam (1977), Ayurvedic
Pharmacopoeia (personal communication) and by a commercial house, Baidyanath
(personal communication), is given in Table I.
   It is commonly advocated that fresh amalaki fruit should be used for the prepara-
tion of Chavanprasha but Alam et al. (1977), on the basis of chemical analysis of the
end product, recommended the use of dry fruit also. These authors observed that
the product manufactured by cooking at a low heat for a longer duration is of better
quality than the product manufactured at a higher temperature. Earlier it was thought
that therapeutic efﬁcacy of Chavanprasha is due to vitamin C, but Alam et al. (1977)
could detect only 19 mg/100 g ascorbic acid from the product prepared at low tem-
peratures from dry fruit and 17 mg/100 g from that of the fresh fruit. The product
obtained using a high temperature had 2.14 mg/100 g and the commercial samples
8.30 to 12.67 mg/100 g vitamin C. Shishoo et al. (1997) determined the vitamin C
contents of amalaki and Chavanprasha by sensitive 0-phenylenediamine ﬂuorometric
methods. The pericarp of a large variety of amla contained 2.915 mg/g, the smaller
variety 3.775 mg/g, the freeze-dried powder 23.24 mg/g and the room-temperature
dried powder 21.04 mg/g of vitamin C. None of the three market samples of Chavan-
prasha investigated contained any vitamin C, which probably gets destroyed during
processing.

Method of preparation Boil 1,000 amalaki fruits in a vessel containing 16 litres of
water. Crush 90 g of each of the herbs mentioned in Table I (except bamboo manna
and spices (cardamom, long pepper, cinnamon leaves, cinnamon, Mesua ferrea)) and tie
them loosely in a cloth to form a bag-like structure. Boil this bag in the vessel
containing amla fruits and 16 litres of water until the water is reduced to one-fourth.
When cool, the bag is taken out of water and discarded, while the amalaki fruit are
kept for making pulp. From the cooked fruits, seeds and ﬁbrous materials are sepa-
rated by passing them through bamboo sieves or through thick ﬁlter cloth. The pulp
is fried in ghee and oil until dehydrated. A decoction of the herbs obtained above is
added to this fried paste and boiling is continued. When the mixture is like a thick
slurry, 4.50 kg sugar is mixed and heating is continued until a jam-like consistency is
obtained. The product is allowed to cool and 500 g honey, 352 g of ﬁne bamboo
manna powder, 175 g of ﬁnely powdered long pepper and all spices are added to the
end product.
   A mechanical way of preparing Chavanprash is to crush blanched amalaki fruit to
form a paste. This paste is passed through a stainless steel sieve to remove non-
digestible portions such as ﬁbres, the seed coat, etc. The paste is then heated with a
decoction of herbs. Pectin tests (as with jam) can be performed by treating the ﬁnished
product with alcohol or by dropping paste in a glass of water. Bearing in mind the
modern trend of using less fat, it has been shown that Chavanprasha made without
frying the pulp in oil or ghee does not deteriorate for many years if properly cooked.
Honey can be omitted in this preparation and sugar can be reduced. For diabetics
invert sugar may be used instead of cane sugar.
   Alam et al. (1977) analysed various samples of Chavanprasha. The samples con-
tained 22.29 to 27.70 per cent reducing sugars, 6.16–6.21 per cent non-reducing
36   Amalaki
sugars and 3.62– 4.13 per cent total fats. The genuine sample had 14.04–18.32 per
cent reducing sugars, 1.24–12.66 per cent non-reducing sugars and 2.19–7.67 per
cent fats. A commercial sample contained 68.9 per cent total sugars and 8.33 per cent
fats.

Dose 10–15 g in the morning and before retiring in the evening. If digestion is
impaired by its use and food intake is reduced, then decrease the dose as per the
digestive power of an individual.

Contraindications Polyurea, acidic urine, constipation, ﬂatulence, diarrhoea, and noc-
turnal spermatic emission.

Precaution Chavanprasha is often made more palatable by adding more sugar and
honey than that prescribed in ancient texts. Most of the commercial preparations
contain up to 570 g of sugar and 60 g honey in one kilogram of preparation, without
any warning for diabetics or individuals who are overweight or have high levels of
cholesterol.

Chavanprasha Special
Chavanprasha is often fortiﬁed with gold and silver foil, saffron, musk (this is now
mainly synthetic), red sulphide of mercury, stag horn or other ingredients which are
supposed to have an invigorating effect. One such formulation is as follows:

Ingredients 2 kg Chavanprasha avleh, 25 mg processed gold, 10 g processed tin, 2 g
saffron, 10 g stag horn ash, 10 g mica (processed 100 times), 2 g silver foils, 5 g
Makardhawaj (red sulphide of mercury).

Method Start with trituration of saffron, followed by other inorganic materials, one
by one, until the whole mass is homogenous. Mix this mass in Chavanprasha. If the
preparation is too thick and proper mixing is not possible add honey to lower the
viscosity.
   Dose 5–10 g.

Uses It increases the aphrodisiac effect of Chavanprasha many times and stimulates all
the body systems. It should only be used in winter or in cold areas. It is said to have
a very strong heating effect on the body and so should not be used in hot areas or
during hot weather.

Therapeutic studies on Chavanprasha
It has an anabolic effect so is recommended for catabolic diseases like chronic infec-
tion, mainly pulmonary. Ojha et al. (1973) observed an increase in body weight
and a 24-hour retention of urinary and faecal nitrogen in experimental animals fed
on it. In other studies Varma et al. (1973) concluded that Chavanprasha toned up
cardiovascular and respiratory systems and improved metabolism, particularly pro-
tein metabolism, and decreased urinary nitrogen and creatine levels. It affected the
positive nitrogen balance. There were increases in serum protein levels, correcting the
                                                                                  Amalaki    37
albumin–globulin ratio. The secretion of urinary muco-polysaccharides and hydroxy-
proline decreased which suggested decreased connective tissue breakdown (this occurs
at a higher rate in old people). The decrease in acetylcholine and histamine sug-
gested improved adrenocortical function. It toned testicular activity with a signiﬁcant
increase in urinary testosterone. It improved respiratory stress, induced improved
stress tolerance by correcting levels of neurohumours. Ojha et al. (1975) used Chavan-
prasha as an adjunct in the treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis; the clinical features
were chronic lung infection and malnutrition. It showed results comparable to those
of anabolic steroids, vitamins and protein supplements, with signiﬁcant increases
in body weight, without any side effects. When administered with antitubercular
drugs there was not only amelioration of symptoms but a relative quick therapeutic
response.
   Savrikar and Bhangle (1984) carried out clinical studies with this preparation,
while Tersia et al. (1982) noted that Chavanprasha was effective in increasing the
body weight and haemoglobin levels considerably. Jose and Kuttan (1995) observed
that aqueous extract inhibited oxygen free radicals. It had an effect on potent inhi-
bitors of lipid peroxide formation and acted as a scavenger of hydroxyl and superoxide
radicals in vitro. Mehrotra et al. (1995) noted adaptogenic and antifungal properties
in it.

Chemical studies
The fruit is very rich in vitamin C. The tannins of the fruit consist of gallic acid and
ellagic acid, which prevent the decomposition of vitamin C in both the raw form as
well as in the ﬁnished product (Brahamchari and Gupi, 1958). In another study,
analysis of the fruits collected in winter showed the following results: vitamin C 921
mg/100 ml in juice, 720/100 mg in pulp, calcium 0.05 per cent phosphorus 0.02 per
cent, iron 1.2 mg and nicotinic acid 0.2 mg.



Table I Comparative study of different formulations of Chavanprasha
Ayurvedic        Botanical      Part      Charak   Puri     Alam      Ayurvedic     Commercial
name             name           used      Smhita   (1970)   (1977)    Pharmaco      (Baidynath)*
                                                                      poeia

Abhya            Terminalia     fruit     +        −        +         +             +
(Haritaki)       chebula
Adusa (Vasa)     Adhatoda       leaves    +        +
                 vasica         root                        +         +
Agaru            Aquillaria     wood      +        +        +         +             +
                 agallocha
Aganimantha      Premna         root      +                 +
                 integrifolia   bark               +
                 Clerodendrum
                 phlomoides                                           +
Amalaki          Phyllanthus    fruit     +        +        +         +             +
                 emblica
Amrita           Tinospora      stem      +        +        +         +             +
(Gaduchi)        cordifolia
Ashtvarga        (no speciﬁc                                                        +
                 herbs)
38       Amalaki
Table I continued
Ayurvedic           Botanical           Part    Charak   Puri     Alam     Ayurvedic   Commercial
name                name                used    Smhita   (1970)   (1977)   Pharmaco    (Baidynath)*
                                                                           poeia
Bala                Sida                herb                      +        +
                    cordifolia          seed                                           +
                                        root    +        +                             +
Banslochan          (Bamboo                     +        +                 +           +
                    concretion)
Bhuiamalaki         Phyllanthus         herb    +                 +        +           +
                    amarus
Bilva               Aegle marmelos      bark    +        +        +        +           +
Brhati              Solanum             herb    +                 +        +           +
                    indicum
Chandan (white)     Santalum            wood                      +        +           +
                    album
Chandan (red)       Ptercarpus          wood    +        +
                    santalinus
Dashmula            (no speciﬁc
                    herbs)                                                             +
Draksha             Vitis               fruit   +        +        +        +           +
                    vinifera
Ela (small)         Elettaria           fruit   +        +        +        +           +
                    cardamomum
Ela (big)           Amomum              fruit   +
                    subulatum
Gambhari            Gamelina            root    +        +        +
(Kasmiri)           arborea             bark                               +           +
Ghee                Butter fat                  +        +        +        +           +
Gokshru (small)     Tribulus            root
                    terrestris                  +        +        +        +           +
Gokshru             Pedalium            fruit                                          +
(big)               murex
Jivak               Ipomea digitata     root                      +                    +
Jivanti             Leptadenia          root    +                 +        +
                    reticulata
Kaknasa             1. Marytenia        root    +                                      +
                        diandra
                    2. Lee aquata                        +
                    3. Pentatrapsis                                        +
                        microphylla
Kakoli              1. Withania         root    +                 +
                        somnifera
                    2. Lilium                                              +
                        polyphyllum
Kakrasinghi         Rhus                galls   +        +
                    succedanea
Kantkari            Solanum             herb    +                 +        +           +
                    surattense          root             +
Kesar               Crocus sativus      style                                          +
Madhu               Honey                       +        +        +        +           +
Mashparni           Teramnus            herb    +        +        +        +           +
                    labialis
Meda                1. Asparagus        root                      +
                        racemosus
                    2. Habeneria                         +
                        intermedia
                    3. Polygonatum                                         +
                        verticillatum
Musta               Cyperus             root    +                 +        +
                    rotundus
                                                                                                    Amalaki      39
Table I continued
Ayurvedic             Botanical           Part        Charak      Puri       Alam       Ayurvedic     Commercial
name                  name                used        Smhita      (1970)     (1977)     Pharmaco      (Baidynath)*
                                                                                        poeia
Nagkesar              Mesua ferrea        stamen      +           +          +          +             +
Patala                Stereospermum       root        +
                      tetragonum          bark                    +          +          +             +
                      Syn.
                      S. suaveolens
Patha                 Cissampelos         leaves      +                                               +
                      pariera
Patra (twak)          Cinnamomum          bark        +           +          +          +             +
(Dalchini)            zeylanicum
Pippali               Piper longum        fruit       +           +          +          +             +
Prishanparni          Uraria picta        herb        +           +
                      Syn.                root                               +          +
                      (U.lagopoides)
Punernava             Boerhaavia          root        +           +          +          +             +
                       difusa
Pushkara mul          1. Inula            root                    +          +          +
                          racemosa
                      2. Saussurea                    +
                          lappa
Riddhi                1. Curculigo        root        +
                          orchiodes
                      2. Habeneria                                +                     +
                          intermedia
                      3. Dioscorea                                           +
                          bulbifera
Rishbhak              1. Microstyllis     root        +
                          wallichi
                      2. Pueraria                                            +
                          tuberosa
Shalparni             Desmodium           herb                    +
                      gangeticum          root        +                      +          +
Sathi                 1. Curcuma          root        +           +          +
                          zedoria
                      2. Hedychium                                                      +
                          spicatum
Shakar (Misri)**      Sugar                           +           +          +          +             +
Sringi                Melaphis            leaves                             +          +
                      chinensis
Shoynka               Oroxylum                        +                      +          +
                      indicum             bark
Tejpat                Cinnamomum          leaves      +           +          +          +             +
                      spp
Til oil               Sesame oil                      +           +          +          +             +
Utpala                Nymphea             ﬂower       +                                 +             +
                      stellata            rhizome                            +
Vanmung               Phaseolus           root        +
                      aconitifolius or                            +
                      P. trilobus
Vidarikand            Pueraria            root                    +          +          +
                      tuberosa

* In addition to these, processed mica, ash of stag horn and red sulphide of mercury is also added.
** It is a sugar reﬁned in Ayurvedic way.
The original formulation in the ancient texts recommended higher quantities of Amalaki fruit but the end product if
prepared with this quantity is unpalatable, so the subsequent formulations contained lesser quantity of Amla and more
of sugar.
40    Amalaki
References
Alam Muzaffer Varadrajan, T.V., Dayala Venkatakrishna, D. (1977) Some studies on
   Cyavanaprasa preparation and standardisation. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, Yoga
   and Homeopathy, 12, 64–71.
Bordia, A., Verma, S.K., Mehta, I.K. Andreais, A.M.R. (1985) Comparative effects of amla
   juice: review. Indian Drugs, 23, 72.
Brahmachari, H.D., Gupi, V.S. (1958) Role of tannins in stabilising the ascorbic acid content
   of the fruit. Indian Journal of Applied Chemistry, 21, 173–174.
Chawla, Y.K., Dubey, P. Singh, R., Nandy, S., Tondon, B.N. (1987) Treatment of dyspepsia
   with amalaki (Emblica ofﬁcinalis) with an Ayurvedic drug. Vagbhata, 5, 24–26.
Chunekar, K.C., Pandey, G.S. Bhavprakash Nighantu (in Hindi). Chokhamba Vidya Bhawan,
   Varansi, India 1969.
Doiphode, V.V. (1993) Suksham Triphala in general practice. Deerghayu International, 3, 21–23.
El-Mekkawy, S., Meselhy, M.R., Kusumoto, I.T., Kadota, S., Hattori, M., Namba, T. (1995)
   Inhibitory effects of Egyptian folk medicines on human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV)
   reverse transcriptase. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 43, 641–648.
Gaind, K.N., Mital, H.C., Khanna, S.R. (1964) Anthelimintic activity of triphala. Indian
   Journal of Pharmacy. 26, 106–107.
Ghosal, S., Tripathi, V.K., Chauhan, S. (1996) Active constituents of Emblica ofﬁcinalis: Part I:
   The chemistry and antioxidative effects of two new hydrolysable tannins, emblicanin A and
   B. Indian Journal of Chemistry, section B. Organic including Medicinal, 35, 941–948.
Ghosh, A., Sharma, A., Talukder, G. (1993) Comparison of the protection afforded by a crude
   extract of Phyllanthus emblica fruit and an equivalent amount of synthetic ascorbic acid
   against the cytotoxic effect of calcium chloride in mice. International Journal of Pharmacognosy,
   31, 116–120.
Ghosh, D., Thejomoorthy, P., Veluchamy, G. (1989) Antiinﬂammatory, antiarthritic and
   analgesic activities of Triphala. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 10, 168–174.
Ghosh, D., Uma, R., Thejomoorthy, P. Veluchamy, G. (1990) Hypoglycaemic and toxicity
   studies of Triphala: a Sidha drug. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 11, 78–89.
Grover, I.S., Simran Kaur (1989) Effect of Emblica ofﬁcinalis Gaertn (Indian Gooseberry) fruit
   extract on sodium azide and nitro-o-pheylenediamine-induced mutagensis in Salmonella
   typhniureum. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 27, 207–209.
Gulati, R.K., Agarwal, S., Agrawal, S.S. (1995) Hepatoprotective studies on Phyllanthus emblica
   Linn. and quercetin. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 33, 261–268.
Gupta, R.A., Singh, B.N., Singh, R.N. (1983) Pharmacological studies on Dasamula kvatha.
   Part I. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 4, 73–84.
Gupta, R.A., Singh, B.N., Singh, R.N. (1984) Pharmacological studies on Dasamula kvatha.
   Part II. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 5, 38– 40.
Janjua, K.M. (1991) Role of minor minerals on human health. Diabetic control with chromium
   containing herbs. Part IV. Hamdard Medicus, 34, 104–106.
Jayaram, S., Walwaikar, P.P., Rajyadhyaksha, S.S. (1993) Evaluation of efﬁcacy of a preparation
   containing combination of Indian medicinal plants in patients of generalised weakness.
   Indian Drugs, 30, 498–500.
Jose, I.K., Kutan, R. (1995) Inhibition of oxygen free radicals by Emblica ofﬁcinalis extract and
   Chavanprasha. Amala Research Bulletin, 15, 46–52.
Kulkarni, P.H. (1995a) Clinical assessment of effect of Sookshma Triphala in Lipoma, in
   Kulkarni, P.H., ed., Ayurveda Research Papers II, pp. 66–71, vide MAPA 9605-2700.
Kulkarni, P.H. (1995b) Clinical assessment of effect of Sookshma Triphala in Lipoma. Biorhythm,
   72–77, vide MAPA 9605-2713.
Kulkarni, P.H. (1995c) Clinical study of effect of Sukshma (subtle) Triphala Guggulu (TG 3X), in
   P.H. Kulkarni, ed., Ayurveda Research Papers II, pp. 50–59, vide MAPA 9605-2716.
                                                                                  Amalaki      41
Mand, J.K., Soni, G.L., Gupta, P.P., Singh, R. (1991) Effect of Amla (Emblica ofﬁcinalis) on
   the development of atherosclerosis in hypercholesterolemic rabbits. Journal of Research and
   Education in Indian Medicine, 10, 1–7.
Mathur, R., Sharma, A., Dixit, V.P., Verma, M. (1996) Hypolipidaemic effect of fruit juice of
   Emblica ofﬁcinalis in cholesterol fed rabbits. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 50, 61–68.
Mehrotra, S., Rawat, A.K.S., Singh, H.K., Shome, U. (1995) Standardisation of popular
   Ayurvedic adaptogenic preparation Chavanprash and ethnobotany of its ingredients.
   Ethnobotany, 7, 1–15.
Morton, J.F. (1957) Emblic (Phyllanthus emblica) rich but neglected source of vitamin C.
   Economic Botany, 31, 223–264.
Murakami, S., Isobe, Y., Kijima, H., Nagai, H., Muramatu, M., Otomo, S. (1991) Inhibition
   of gastric H+, K+-ATPase and acid secretion by ellagic acid. Planta Medica, 57, 305–308.
Ojha, J.K., Bajpai, H.S., Sharma, P.V., Khanna, M.N., Shukla, P.K., Sharma, T.N. (1973)
   Chavanprasha as an anabolic agent: experimental study (preliminary work). Journal of Research
   in Indian Medicine, 8, 11–19.
Ojha, J.K., Khanna, M.N., Bajpai, H.S., Sharma, P.V., Sharma, T.N. (1975) A clinical study
   of Chavanprasha as an adjunct in the treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis. Journal of Research
   in Indian Medicine, 10, 1– 4.
Pakrashi, A., Bandyopadhyaya, S. (1996–97) Effect of Phyllanthus emblica extract on peptic
   ulcer. Phytomedicine, 3(supp.), 66.
Puri, H.S. (1970) Chavanprasha: an ancient Indian preparation for respiratory diseases. Indian
   Drugs, 7, 15–16.
Pranjpe, P., Kulkarni, P.H. (1995) Comparative efﬁcacy of four Ayurvedic formulations in the
   treatment of acne vulgaris: a double blind randomised placebo controlled clinical evaluation.
   Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 49, 127–132.
Paranjpe, P., Patki, P., Patwardhan, B. (1990) Ayurvedic treatment of obesity. A randomized
   double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trial. Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 29, 1–11.
Roy, A.K., Dhir, H., Sharma, A., Talukder, G. (1991) Phyllanthus emblica fruit extract and
   ascorbic acid modify hepatotoxic and renotoxic effects of metals in mice. International Journal
   of Pharmacognosy, 29, 117–126.
Roy, S., Khan, S.U., Siddiqui, H.H., Arora, R.B. (1987) Bioavailability of ascorbic acid in
   children as a method of standardisation of amla and vitamin C rich herbal extracts. (AH-II)
   Hamdard Medicus, 30, 229–238.
Savrikar, S.S., Bhangle, P.K. (1984) Clinical study of Chavanprasha Avaleh. Nagarjun, 27,
   117–119.
Seshagiri, Rao, Kusumkumari, K., Netaji, B., Subhakta, P.K.J.P. (1985) A pilot study of Svet
   pradra (Leucorrhoea) with Amalaki Guggul. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 6,
   213.
Shishoo, C.J., Shah, S.A., Rathod, I.S., Patel, S.G. (1997) Determination of vitamin C content of
   Phyllanthus emblica and Chyavanprash. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 59, 268–270.
Siddique, T.O., Ahmed, J. (1985) Vitamin C contents of Indian Medicinal plants: a literature
   review. Indian Drugs, 23, 72.
Singh, I.P., Guru, L.V. (1975) The effect of Amalaki rasayana on experimental rats with special
   reference to their nitrogen balance. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, 10, 141–146.
Singh, K.P., Singh, R.H. (1985) Recent advances in the management of amalpitta Parinam
   sula (non-ulcer dyspepsia and peptic ulcer dyspepsia). Journal of Resesarch in Ayurveda and
   Siddha, 6, 32.
Singh, R.K., Londhe, C.S. (1993) Use of Triphala Kwath in Swet Pradera (leucorrhoea). Deerghayu
   International, 9, 15–17.
Suresh, K., Vasudevan, D.M. (1994) Augmentation of murine natural killer cell and antibody
   dependent cellular cytotoxicity activities by Phyllanthus emblica, a new immunomodulator.
   Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 44, 55–60.
42   Amalaki
Tariq, M., Hussain, S.J., Asif, M., Jahan, M. (1977) Protective effect of fruit extracts of Emblica
  ofﬁcinalis Gaertn and Terminalia belerica Roxb., in experimental myocardial necrosis in rats.
  Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 15, 485– 486.
Tersia, T.L., Sridhar, B.N., Pillai, B.K.R. (1982) Effect of Chyavanaprasha on malnutrition.
  Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha. 3, 119–123.
Tewari, A., Sen, S.P., Guru, L.V. (1968) The effect of Amalaki (Phyllanthus emblica) rasayana on
  biologic systems. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, 2, 189.
Thakur, C.P., Mandal, K. (1984) Effect of Emblica ofﬁcinalis on cholesterol-induced atherosclerosis
  in rabbits. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 79, 142–146.
Thresiamma, K.C., George, J., Kuttan, R. (1996) Protective effect of curcumin, ellagic acid
  and bixin on radiation-induced toxicity. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 34, 845–847.
Treadway, Linda (1988) Amla, traditional food and medicine. Herbalgram, 31, 26–27.
Tripathi, P.C., Shaw, B.P., Mishra, R.K., Mishra, P.K. (1992) The role of amalaki in the
  management of amlapitta. Indian Medicine, 42, 11.
Vani, T., Rajani, M., Srakar, S., Shishoo, C.J. (1997) Antioxidant properties of the Ayurvedic
  formulation Triphala and its constituents. International Journal of Pharmacy, 35, 313–317.
Varma, M.D., Singh, R.H., Udupa, K.N. (1973) Biological, endocrine and metabolic studies
  on the effect of rasayana on aged persons. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, Yoga and
  Homeopathy, 8, 1–9.
Varma, M.D., Singh, R.H, Gupta, J.P., Udupa, K.N. (1977) Amalaki rasayana in the treatment
  of chronic peptic ulcer. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, Yoga and Homoeopathy, 12, 1–9.
Yaqueenuddin, Quereshi, I., Mirza, M., Yaqeen, Z. (1990) Pharmacological evaluation of the
  antiemetic action of Emblica ofﬁcinalis Gaertn. Pakistan Journal of Scientiﬁc and Industrial
  Research, 33, 268–269.
Zachariah, G. (1984) Emblica ofﬁcinalis: A remedy for hyperhidrosis. Antiseptic, 81, 312–315.
                                                                         Anantmul 43

8      Anantmul




    Hemidesmus indicus R. Br
    Family: Asclepiadaceae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is also known as Indian Sarsaparilla. It should be distinguished from American
Sarsaparilla, Smilax aristolochaefolia Mill and Jamaican Sarsaparilla, Smilax ornata
Hook f.
   It is a latex containing creeper (Fig. 3A) with opposing leaves that are 5–10 cm
long with white streaks. Flowers are in bunches, greenish from outside but violet from
inside. Follicles are 10 to 15 cm long. It grows in the sub-tropical forests of east and
south India. The root of anantmul is 1–2 cm thick, blackish brown and wrinkled on
the outside. The central woody portion is quite distinct (Fig. 3B). It has a pleasant
camphoraceous smell and a mild bitter, astringent taste. The active ingredients are
contained in the bark.
   In Ayurveda, there is a confusion about the botanical identiﬁcation of another
herb sariva. Some authors think that H. indicus is white sariva (Karnick, 1977).


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

As per Ayurveda, it is cooling, sweet, anabolic, heavy, oily, bitter, aromatic laxative,
sudoriﬁc and a blood puriﬁer. It stimulates the ﬂow of bile and is antidote to
tridosha and body toxins. It helps in leucoderma, malodour from the body and
bronchial problems, leucorrhoea, gastroenteritis, inﬂammation, physical weakness,
fatigue, weight loss, threatened miscarriage and kidney stones. It cures skin diseases
and ulcerations, especially those of syphilitic origin. The other major uses of this
herb are:

Diuretic effect
The decoction of root increases urine output by three to four times. When used with
Tinospora spp. this herb’s effect is enhanced further.
44    Anantmul




     Figure 3 Hemidesmus indicus A branch, B follicles, C dry root pieces.



In urino-genital problems
With Tinospora and cumin, it relieves inﬂammation of urethra and burning micturition.
The decoction of 3 g powder of the herb helps with prostate problems.

In sexually transmitted diseases
With Tinopspra spp., it is a valuable remedy for third and fourth stages of syphilis and
its numerous manifestations. It may be used as follows:
                                                                            Anantmul 45
1   Give a decoction made from equal parts of Citrullus colocynthis root, anantmul,
    Ichnocarpus, Hedyotis auriculata, to the patient as per the drinking capacity along
    with long pepper and Commiphora wightii powder.
2   Pulverize 5 parts of anantmul, 4 parts of Vetiveria, 5 parts of Cyperus scariosus, 6
    parts of Picrorhiza and 4 parts of ginger. Prescribe a dose of 5–10 g of this
    preparation.

For infants and children
Hot infusion of the root with milk and sugar is a tonic for children with chronic
coughs and diarrhoea.

As a laxative
Make a paste of 25 g each of anantmul, Pavonia odorata, Cyperus rotundus, ginger and
Picrorhiza. Prescribe 10 g of this paste, twice daily with warm water.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

It suppressed both the cell mediated and humoral component of the immune system
(Atal et al. 1986).
   The glycosides had an anti-tumour property (Deepak et al. 1997).

Chemical studies
The following compounds have been reported; coumarins, volatile oil, crystalline
principle hemidesmine (Nadakarni, 1954), two sterols–hemidesterol and hemidesmol
(Chunekar and Pandey, 1969) and pregnane glycoside (Deepak et al. 1997). The major
component of the essential oil has been identiﬁed as p-methoxy salicylic aldehyde.

References
Atal, C.K., Sharma, M.L., Kaul, A., Khajuria, A. (1986) Immunomodulating agents of plant
  origin. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 18, 133–141.
Chunekar K.C., Pandey, G.S. Bhavprakash Nighantu (in Hindi) Chowkhamba Vidya Bhawan,
  Varanasi, India 1969.
Deepak, D., Srivastava, S., Khare, A. (1997) Pregnane glycoside from Hemidesmus indicus.
  Phytochemistry, 44, 145–151.
Karnick, C.R. (1977) Ethnobotanical, pharmacognostical and cultivation studies of Hemidesmus
  indicus R. Br. (Indian Sarsaparilla). Herba Hungarica, 16, 7–12.
Nadkarni, K.M. Indian Materia Medica. Vol I. Popular Prakashan, Bombay, India 1954.
46   Ashwagandha

9      Ashwagandha




     Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal
     Family: Solanaceae

It is also known as Indian ginseng.


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

The herb grows as a weed in the drier part of India on waste land. A cultivar is being
cultivated on a large scale in some parts of central India. The plant is an evergreen
shrub, 1–2 m high, with the whole body covered with star shaped hairs. Leaves
(Fig. 4A) are simple, petiolate, ovate, and glabrous. Flowers are inconspicuous, in
axillary clusters, light green or pale yellow, calyx membraneous. Berries are small,
globose, orange red when mature with numerous yellow reniform seed. In wild forms
the roots (Fig. 4B) are thick, ﬁbrous, brown to dark brown and may even get twisted
with age, with very little starch. However, in the cultivated plants, the root (Fig. 4C)
is pale white, cylindrical and starchy.
   Four chemotypes of W. somnifera have been recognised so far within the plant’s
natural population. The biological activity of these cultivars varies signiﬁcantly and
their biochemical heterogenity has been established. The cultivated variety, which
probably originated near the town Nagaur in Rajasthan (India) and was hence known
as Asgandh Nagori, became popular because of the starchy nature of its root. Asgandh
Nagori is sown in the rainy season and the roots are ready for harvesting in winter.
There is a controversy about the botanical nature of this plant. Some authors are of
the opinion that it is a cultivated variety of Withania, while others identify it as a
distinct species, W. ashwagandha Kaul. Further details on this and other aspects of
Withania can be had from the book on this herb by Sandhya Singh and Sushil Kumar
(1998).


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

Since ancient times ashwagandha has been considered a nervine tonic, alterative, aph-
rodisiac, deobstruent (having the property of removing obstruction in any system of
the human body) and a sedative. It has been used in rheumatism, consumption and in
debility. The Indian name ashwagandha (ashwa- horse, gandha- smell), now commonly
                                                                       Ashwagandha      47




    Figure 4 Withania somnifera A twig, B dry root from wild plants, C dry root from
             cultivated plants.



called asgandh or asgand, is due to the smell that arises from the fresh root. In Ayurvedic
texts, it is mentioned that this herb imparts the power and (sexual) strength of horse
to a man.
   Ashwagandha can be used by persons of both sexes, of all ages and at all stages of
their lives. In elders it provides energy, relieves inﬂammations, pains and aches of the
back, hand and feet, and in the generative system, nervous debility and diseases due to
48   Ashwagandha
vata. It is being prescribed as an anabolic agent, as an adaptogen and analgesic for
the treatment of various arthropathies, certain forms of hypertension, insanity, etc. It
imparts resistance to infection and stress. It stimulates sexual impulses and increases
sperm counts. It is considered a Rasayana, for strength, vigour and for rejuvenation.
The easiest way to use the root is to take one teaspoonful of the ﬁne powder with
sweetened milk, or mix the powder with ghee, lick the mixture followed by milk
sweetened with sugar candy.
   In gynecological practice it helps in sterility, leucorrhoea and inﬂammation of the
vagina. It also helps breast development. For these purposes, take one teaspoonful of
ashwagandha powder with half a teaspoonful of ghee, and honey before breakfast in the
morning and before sleeping in the evening, followed by cold sweet milk. It must be
taken for three months, particularly during winter.
   Ayurvedic scholars consider the wild root to be a narcotic (the speciﬁc name somnifera
means sleep inducer which implies its sedative nature) which should be applied exter-
nally to inﬂammation, boils, pimples and as an ingredient of massage oils. For internal
consumption the wild root should be mitigated by boiling it in milk. Asgandh Nagori
can be used as such.
   Some of the important recipes of ashwagandha are as follows:

As a Rasayana

Method Mix the powders of 100 g Withania, 50 g Tinospora, and 10 g of Tinospora
(see gaduchi) starch.

Dose Mix half a teaspoonful of this powder with half a teaspoon of ghee and two tea
spoons of honey. Drink with cold sweetened milk twice daily for sixty days.
  For infants and children, as a nutritive tonic, boil 1–2 g of this powder in a cup of
milk, add to it 9–10 drops of ghee and give 1 teaspoonful of this warm milk to infants
and two teaspoons to children.

Use As a general tonic for all ages for vigour, vitality, nutrition, and stamina. It is a
good nutritive tonic for malnourished men. It helps male sexual inadequacies (impot-
ence, premature ejaculation, partial erection of penis, inability to perform the sex act,
lack of libido and stamina, etc.).

For premature ejaculation
Pulverize 100 g each of Withania, Argyreia, Hygrophila, Glycyrrhiza and sugar candy.
Take 10 g of this mixture with honey, and drink with milk.

In azoospermia
It is alleged that too much sexual indulgence through masturbation and other per-
verted sexual actions may lead to the collapse of vital body systems. For a cure, take in
the morning on an empty stomach for 3– 4 months, one teaspoon of asgandh, half a
teaspoon of sugar candy, a quarter teaspoon of long pepper, half a teaspoon ghee and
one and a half teaspoons of honey, followed by 200 ml milk boiled with one teaspoon
of Withania, and one teaspoon of ghee.
                                                                     Ashwagandha     49
During pregnancy
A decoction of 10 g aswagandha powder in a cup of water, when used for 2–3 months,
provides nutrition to both the mother and foetus.

In leucorrhoea
I Take one teaspoon of asgandh powder and sugar with warm water for 3– 4 months. It
not only cures the disease but strengthens the body.
II Mix the ﬁne powders of 100 g each of asgandh and vidhara, 20 g each of cardamom
and eggshell ash, 10 g of processed tin and 150 g of sugar candy. Take 3 g of this
powder, twice daily for four months.

For vata diseases
Due to indigestion and constipation, vata gets vitiated. For pacifying it, one tea
spoonful of Ashwagandhadi Ghrit can be administered with a glass of water or make a
mixture of equal quantities of Withania and Asparagus powders, with sugar candy.
Take one teaspoon of this with milk twice daily.

In sterility
If conception is not possible due to improper ovum development, women should be
prescribed 10 g Withania powder roasted in a small quantity of ghee on a low heat,
followed by boiling it in a glass of milk for 15–20 minutes. This preparation should
be taken for three days before and seven days after menstruation, freshly prepared and
warm, in the morning on an empty stomach. Continue this treatment every month,
until pregnant.

For sleeplessness
Take one teaspoon of Withania with ghee and honey every evening. If sleeplessness is
due to vata add 2 g of long pepper to the above mixture.

As a galactagogue
For increasing milk during lactation, make a ﬁne powder of equal quantities of Withania,
Asparagus, Pueraria tuberosa and liquorice. This powder is taken twice daily.


AYURVEDIC PREPARATIONS

Ashwagandhadi Churn

Method   Pulverize 100 g Withania root, 100 g Argyreia speciosa root.

Dose 5 g twice daily with sweet milk or moisten the powder with ghee (butter oil),
chew the mixture and swallow, followed by milk after 20 minutes or so. The powder
can be administered with water but milk is preferred.
50    Ashwagandha
Use A. speciosa fortiﬁes the effect of ashwagandha. It should be drunk with milk. This
churn strengthens physical, mental and sexual systems, particularly those of lean and
thin persons. It builds resistance against infection, helps sleeplessness, nervous break-
down, memory, wrinkles on the face and premature ageing.

Asgandh pak

Method 1 kg Aswagandh powder, 500 g dry ginger, 250 g Piper longum, 112 g black
pepper, 16 litre milk, 2 kg ghee (butter oil), ten g each of cinnamon, Cinnamomum spp.
leaves, Mesua ferrea, cardamom, clove, Piper longum root, nutmeg, valerian, sandalwood,
Cyperus scariosus. Emblica ofﬁcinalis, bamboo manna (silicic acid), catechu, Plumbago zeylanicum
root bark, Asparagus racemosus and Pavonia odorata powders. Syrup from 4 kg icing sugar.
   Boil milk until reduced to half, add powders of Withania, ginger, long pepper and
black pepper to it. Concentrate further until solid. Roast this condensed milk in ghee
and add syrup made from the sugar, heat further and add ﬁne powders of all the
remaining items. When still warm, make balls of 10 g each.

Dose 10 g twice daily.

Use   A general tonic for all ages.

Ashwagandha Ghrit

Method Asgandh root, 500 g coarse powder and 100 g ﬁne powder, 250 g ghee, 1 litre
cow’s milk.

Method Boil coarse asgandha powder in 4 litres of water to obtain 1 litre of decoction.
Separately make a paste of ﬁne powder of aswagandha in water. Add this paste to the
ﬁltered decoction, followed by ghee, milk and heat until the fatty matter is free from
moisture.

Dose Half to one teaspoon with sugar candy and milk as per the digestive power of
an individual.

Indications Ashwagandha Ghrit is very beneﬁcial to infants (dose 3– 4 drops with
milk) and to children (dose 3 g to half teaspoon). It is highly nutritious. It makes the
body strong, sturdy and stimulates the nervous system. It gives strength, cures dis-
eases due to vata, arthritis, back pain, weakness in any part of the body, sleeplessness,
sexual debility, depression, and nervous tension.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Psychotropic effects
It showed barbiturate hypnosis potentiation effect and a decrease in locomotive activ-
ity. It reduced the depletion of acetylcholine and catecholmine in the brain (Singh
                                                                        Ashwagandha      51
et al. 1979). It affected drug-induced narcosis in female and male mice (Ahmuda et al.
1991b). The total alkaloids exhibited prolonged hypotensive, bradycardia, respiratory
stimulation, relaxant and antispasmodic effects, similar to papaverine, on intestinal,
uterine, bronchial, and vascular systems. In mice, these prolonged sleeping time,
as well as having a nicotenolytic effect. They increased the levels of serotonin and
histamine in brain tissue. The protective effect of asgandh extract against pentylenetet-
razole (PTZ) has been seen to induce convulsions in mice. This was dose dependent
(Kulkarni et al. 1993) and was comparable to diazepam in both chemical and electrical
kindling (Kulkarni and George, 1995) and against amygdaloid kindling (Kulkarni
et al. 1995). Root extract protected electrographic activity in a lithium-pilocarpine
model of status epilepticus. Acute pre-treatment with the extract enhanced the
antiepileptic effect of diazepam and clonazepam (Kulkarni et al. 1998).

As an anabolic agent
Ashwagandha increased body weight, total protein content and mean corpuscular hae-
moglobin in children. A weight promoting effect in young children was observed,
without any toxic effect, even after 8 months of continuous daily administration
(Venkatraghavan et al. 1984). This anabolic effect of Withania may be due to the fact
that:

1   It contains steroidal substances, which enhance liver glycogen.
2   It stimulates the appetite by exhibiting anti-serotonergic activity, like cyprohep-
    tidine, with maximum effect in children.
3   It reduces adenocortical activity and has a sedative effect.
4   The depressant action produced by this herb may reduce metabolic rate leading to
    diminished calorie utilization and tendency towards weight gain. Ashwagandha-
    fed animals showed a reduction of 1.5°C in body temperature, which signiﬁes
    lower metabolic rate and underutilization of glycogen.
5   It promotes growth by enhancing the growth of tissue components, with and
    without the release of growth hormones.
6   It increases liver weight, with no histopathological aberrations of cellular structures.

Immunomodulator activity
The important constituents of ashwagandha, withaferin A and withanolide D, induced
signiﬁcant immunosuppressive activity (Shobat et al. 1978). It was an immunomodulator
and chemoprotector against cyclophosphamide (Praveen Kumar et al. 1994, Davis and
Kuttan, 1998). It had the potential to alleviate the adverse effects of morphine and the
attendant immunodepression (Ramarao et al. 1995). A signiﬁcant modulation of
immune activity was observed in three animal models used. It prevented myelosuppres-
sion of mice treated with all three immunosuppresive drugs tested, with signiﬁcant
increase in haemolytic antibody response towards human erythrocytes (Ziauddin et al.
1996).

Anticancerous activity
Withania was able to arrest cell division, produce mitotic abnormality in meta-
phase block and chromosome breakage in tissue culture of tumours. Cells in the
52   Ashwagandha
resting stage were undamaged but the active cells degenerated. Withaferin A from
the root exhibited signiﬁcant retardation of tumour growth against sarcoma 180
and KB human carcinoma cells (Palyi et al. 1969). It also had antineoplastic act-
ivity. It prevented urethane-induced decreases in body weight, increased mortality
and induced lung adenomas in albino mice. Simultaneous oral administration of
asgandha in a dose of 200 mg/kg along with urethane protected the animals from
the tumour inducing effect of this compound (Singh et al. 1986). Budhiraja and
Sudhir (1987) also observed antitumour property from withanolides. Uma Devi
et al. (1992, 1993, 1996) tried alcohol extract of ashwagandha and withaferin A and
found that both had in vivo inhibitory effect on transplantable mouse tumour Sarcoma
180. Ganasoundri et al. (1997) and Sheena et al. (1998) conﬁrmed this research.
Dhuley (1997) studied the effect of W. somnifera on the function of the macrophages
obtained from the mice treated with the carcinogen ochratoxin A. The chemot-
actic activity of murine macrophages was signiﬁcantly decreased compared with the
control. Production of interlukin-1 and tumour necrosis factor was also markedly
reduced.

As an adjuvant to cancer therapy
Ashwagandha showed a radiosensitizing effect. It increased the effect of radiation on
tumour regression and delayed the growth of tumours. When it was administered for
ten days, with exposure to gamma radiation followed by hyperthermia, there was
a signiﬁcant increase in tumour cure (Uma Devi et al. 1993). A 75 per cent methanol
extract of the herb signiﬁcants increased the total blood cell count, bone marrow
cellularity and lymphocyte. Leucopenia, induced by sub-lethal dose of gamma radia-
tion, was reduced. It normalized the ratio of norchromatic and polychromatic erythro-
cytes after radiation exposure (Anand and Kuttan, 1995; Kuttan, 1996). Beneﬁcial
effects were seen when this drug was given before and after radiation (Bhattathiri et al.
1995). Uma Devi (1996) and Uma Devi et al. (1996) conﬁrmed that withaferin is a
good, natural source of a safe radiosensitizing agent.

Antistress activity
Withania improved mental functions by reducing stress (Shukla, 1981) due to its mild
depressant action on the body. It induced a state of non-speciﬁc increase in resistance
during stress (Sankara Subramanian, 1982). This antistress activity is useful in the
prevention of stress-induced gastric ulcer, liver toxicity, leucocytosis, carcinoma,
leucopenia, and hypertension, etc. (Singh et al. 1982). It inﬂuenced the dopaminergic
system, which has been implicated in stress (Saksena et al. 1989). It was tried in 25
cases of depressive illness for two months. It showed notable symptomatic improvement,
decrease in degree of anxiety and depression (Singh and Murthy, 1989; Singh et al.
1990). The root extract which had CNS depressant properties showed an antianxiety
effect in the patients with anxiety neurosis (Gandhi, 1994). It helped in stress-induced
response from anxiety, depression, analgesia, thermic changes, gastric ulcers, convul-
sions, and restored stress-induced depletion of the adrenals and ascorbic acid (Sandhya
Singh and Sushil Kumar, 1998).
   Looking into the central nervous system depressant action of this root, Pande and
Sharma, (1992) suggested its use as an anaesthesia.
                                                                      Ashwagandha     53
  Gandhi et al. (1995) tested anabolic activity and endurance time by feeding mice
with ginseng and ashwagandha. Both herbs were effective but ashwagandha had a
better weight gaining capacity.

In cervical spondylosis
Withania (4 g) and Smilax china decoction was tried on 25 radiological conﬁrmed cases
of cervical spondylosis for 30 days. This herbal combination was as effective as Brufen
and was without side effects (Shareef, 1993).

As an adaptogen
Singh (1982) studied the adaptogenic property of ashwagandha. It increased swimming
endurance in mice and prevented gastric ulcers-induced chemically by stress in rats.
Bhattacharya et al. (1987) isolated the compounds which were uniformly active in
attenuating stress-induced responses ranging from anxiety, depression, analgesia, thermic
changes, gastric ulcers, convulsions, tribulin activity and adrenocortical activation.
Roy et al. (1992a, b) and Srivastava (1995) studied the changes in the psychophysiolo-
gical status of trainee mountaineers by altitude gain up to 7,000 m and then descending.
Ashwagandh, administered 500 mg daily, altered behaviour including sleep pattern,
alertness, state of awareness, along with other physical capabilities.

As a geriatric tonic
When studied for its effect on the ageing process in healthy male adults, it showed
signiﬁcant increases in haemoglobin count and hair melanin, with decreases in nail
calcium, serum cholesterol and erythrocyte sedimentation (Kuppurajan et al. 1980;
Ahmuda et al. 1991a, b). Bhattacharya et al. (1995) studied the effect of glycowith-
anolides on animal models of Alzheimer’s disease and perturbed central cholinergic
markers of cognition in rats. The effects validated its use as a promoter of learning and
memory.
   Intake of a herbal capsule consisting of Withania, Tribulus and ginseng with milk
enhanced certain aspects of psychomotor performance. An increase in strength, viabil-
ity process and endurance time was shown (Karnick, 1992).

As an antiulcerogenic agent
It had a signiﬁcant dose-dependent effect on aspirin-induced gastric ulcers. It reduced
the ulcer index and caused the healing of ulcers (Sahni and Srivastava, 1993, 1994).

As an antiinﬂammatory agent
Bector (1968) studied the role of ashwgandha on various types of arthritis. Immuno
electrophoresis studies revealed that this herb changed the concentration of various
serum proteins. A therapeutic dose of 100 mg/kg body weight showed 46 per cent
anti-inﬂammatory activity on paw volumes in rats (Anbalgan and Sadique, 1981a, b).
A compound withaferin A inhibited adjuvant arthritis (Bahr and Hansel, 1982).
Budhiraja et al. (1984) observed the marked effect of another compound from the root
54   Ashwagandha
in sub acute inﬂammation. A comparison showed it to be better than phenylbutazone
and hydrocortisone. Administration of Withania to inﬂamed rats caused a signiﬁcant
reduction in the level of alpha-2-macroglobulin and enhanced the synthesis of total
serum protein (Anbalagan and Sadique, 1985). Hazeena Begum and Sadique (1988)
studied long term effects of the herb on induced arthritis in rats. It prevented body-
weight loss during the arthritic conditions and reduced paw swellings during the
secondary lesions. Radiographic observations revealed that it prevented bone degenera-
tion and compared well with hydrocortisone. Al-Hindawi et al. (1992), Sahni and
Srivastava (1994, 1995) and Nanshine et al. (1995) conﬁrmed anti-inﬂammatory effect
of this root.
   Kulkarni et al. (1991, 1992) tried an Ayurvedic preparation containing Withania,
Boswellia and Curcuma. It relieved pain, morning stiffness, and caused a drop in ery-
throcyte sedimentation.

In skin problems
For keratitis and rough skin Gupta et al. (1994) prescribed Ashwagandha Rasayana,
by concentrating ashwagandha powder seven times with ashwagandha decoction until
completely dry and prescribed it in a dose 3 g twice daily. This preparation also
stopped female hair loss after childbirth.

In liver diseases
The protective effect of withanolides against carbon tetrachloride-induced hepato-
toxicity is well known (Budhiraja et al. 1986). Some of the modern drugs are known
to cause hepatotoxicity. Ashwagandha can be an important adjuvant to these types
of chemicals (Chhajed et al. 1991). When used with long pepper, it produced marked
histopathological changes in induced hepatotoxicity. Withania, with other herbs,
acted as a free radical scavenging agent for pancreatic islets (Bhattacharya et al.
1997a).

As an antioxidant
Dhuley (1998) evaluated the effect of ashwagndha on lipid peroxidation in stress-
induced animals. It prevented the rise in lipid peroxidation. This antioxidant activity
of glycowithanolids (sitoindosides VII-X, and withaferin A) was investigated for their
effects on rat brain. These withanolides had a dose-dependent effect. This antioxidant
effect may, at least in part, explain the antistress, immunomodulatory, cognition-
facilitating, anti-inﬂammatory and anti-ageing effects of this herb reported in earlier
studies (Bhattacharya et al. 1997b).
   Sunanda Panda et al. (1997) investigated the effect of root extract containing 1.75
per cent withanolides in mice treated with cadmium chloride. Ashwagndha treatment
attenuated lipid peroxidation induced by cadmium.

Chemical studies
During the earlier studies Sankara Subramanian (1982) found that the total alkaloids
in the root are 0.13–0.32 per cent. Besides alkaloids, steroidal lactones under the
                                                                            Ashwagandha       55
generic name, withanolides, have been reported. Chemical studies of the four chemotypes
of this plant showed that the main constituent of chemotype I is withaferin A, and
that of chemotype II withanolide D, chemotype III is characterized by the presence of
two groups of compounds: withanolide G & H and E & F. The chemotype IV is rich
in withaferin A and withanone.

Toxicological studies
When withaferin A was studied for acute toxicity, a single injection of 50 mg/kg body
weight did not cause any deaths. Higher doses of 100 mg/kg and above produced
diarrhoea and severe weight loss. A single intraperitoneal injection of 1,100 mg/kg
of the extract in mice did not cause any deaths within 24 hours. The LD50 value
was calculated as 1,260 mg/kg body weight. Sub acute toxicity studies with repeated
injections of extract at a dose of 100 mg/kg body weight for 30 days, in rats of either
sex, did not result in any mortality or changes in peripheral blood constituents (Sharada
et al. 1993a, b). It was devoid of side effects even after 8 months of use.

References
Ahumada, F., Aspee, F., Wikman, G., Hancke, J. (1991a) Withania somnifera extract. Its effect
  on arterial blood pressure in anaesthesized dogs. Phytotherapy Research, 5, 111–114.
Ahumada, F., Trincado, M.A., Arellano, J.A., Hancke, J., Wikman, G. (1991b) Effect of
  certain adaptogenic plant extracts on drug-induced necrosis in female and male mice.
  Phytotherapy Research, 5, 29–31.
Al-Hindawi, M.K., Al-Khafaji, S.H., Abdul Nabi, M.H. (1992) Anti-granuloma activity of
  Iraqi Withania somnifera. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 37, 113–116.
Anand, I.V., Kuttan, G. (1995) Use of Withania somnifera as an adjuvant during radiation
  therapy. Amala Research Bulletin, 15, 83–87.
Anbalagan, K., Sadique, J. (1981a) Inﬂuence of an Indian medicine (Ashwgandha) on acute
  phase reactants in inﬂammation. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 19, 245–249.
Anbalagan, K., Sadique, J. (1981b) Response of alpha-1 globulins of serum during inﬂamma-
  tion. Current Science, 50, 88–89.
Anbalagan, K., Sadique, J. (1985) Withania somnifera (Ashwagandha): a rejuvenating herbal
  drug which controls alpha-2 micro-globulin synthesis during inﬂammation. International
  Journal of Crude Drug Research, 23, 177–183.
Bahr, V., Hansel, R. (1982) Immunomodulating properties of 5,20 α ® dihydroxy 6 χ7 α
  epoxy-1-oxo(s a) with a-2,24 dieolide and solasodine. Planta Medica, 44, 32–33.
Bector, N.P. (1968) Role of Withania somnifera (Ashwagandha) in various types of arthropathies.
  Indian Journal of Medical Research, 56, 1581–1583.
Bhattacharya, S.K., Ashok Kumar, Ghoshal, S. (1995) Effects of glycowithanolides from Withania
  somnifera on an animal model of Alzheimer’s disease and perturbed central cholinergic
  markers of cognition in rats. Phytotherapy Research, 9, 110–113.
Bhattacharya, S.K., Goel, R.K., Ravinder Kaur, Ghoshal, Shibnatha (1987) Anti stress activity
  of sitoindosides VII and VIII. New acylsteryl glucosides from Withania group. Phytotherapy
  Research, 1, 32–38.
Bhattacharya, S.K., Satyan, K.S., Chakraborti, A. (1997a) Effect of Trasina, an Ayurvedic
  herbal formulation, on pancreatic islet superoxide dismutase activity in rats. Indian Journal
  of Experimental Biology, 35, 297–299.
Bhattacharya, S.K., Satyan, K.S., Ghoshal, Shibnath (1997b) Antioxidant activity of glycowithano-
  lides from Withania somnifera. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 35, 236–239.
56   Ashwagandha
Bhattathiri, V.N., Uma Devi, P., Sreelekha, T., Remani, P., Vijaykumar, T., Nair M.K. (1995)
  Biochemical modulation of GSH by ashwagnadha: relation to its usefulness as a radiosensitizer.
  International Conference on Current Progress in Medicinal and Aromatic Plant Research, Calcutta,
  India. 30 December 1994–1 January 1995.
Budhiraja, R.D., Garg, K.N., Sudhir, S., Arora, B. (1986) Protective effect of 3-β hydroxy-2,
  3 dihydrowithanolide F against CCl4-induced hepatotoxicity. Planta Medica, 52, 28–29.
Budhiraja, R.D., Sudhir, S. (1987) Review of biological activity of withanolides. Journal of
  Scientifc and Industrial Research, 46, 488– 491.
Budhiraja, R.D., Sandhu, S., Garg, K.N. (1984) Anti-inﬂammatory activity of 3β hydroxy-2,
  3-dihyro withanolide F. Planta Medica, 50, 134.
Chhajed, S., Baghel, M.S., Ravishankar, B., Singh, G. (1991) Evaluation of hepatoprotective
  effect of Piper longum (Pippali) and Withania somnifera in hepatotoxicity induced by antituber-
  cular drugs in mice. Journal of Research and Education in Indian Medicine, 10, 9–12.
Davis, L., Kuttan, G. (1998) Suppressive effect of cyclophosphamaide-induced toxicity by
  Withania somnifera extract in mice. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 62, 209–214.
Dhuley, J.N. (1997) Effect of some Indian herbs on macrophage functions in ochratoxin A
  treated mice. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 58, 15–20.
Dhuley, J.N. (1998) Effect of ashwagandha on lipid peroxidation in stress-induced animals.
  Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 60, 173–178.
Ganasoundari, A., Zare, S.M., Uma Devi, P. (1997) Modiﬁcation of bone marrow radiosensitivity
  by medicinal plant extracts. British Journal of Radiology, 70, 599–602.
Gandhi, A., Mujumdar, A.M., Patwardhan, B. (1995) A comparative pharmacological investiga-
  tion of Ashwgandha and ginseng. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 44, 131–135.
Gandhi, S.S. (1994) The potential of Withania somnifera as an antistress agent. Update Ayurveda–
  94, Bombay, India. 24 to 26 February 1994.
Gupta, O.P., Dube, C.B., Ansari, Z. (1994) A clinical study of ashwagandha rasayana in
  patients of keratin and rough skin. National Seminar on the use of Traditional Medicinal Plants
  in Skin care, CIMAP, Lucknow, 25–26 November 1994.
Hazeena Begum, V., Sadique, J. (1988) Long term effect of herbal drug Withania somnifera
  on adjuvant-induced arthritis in rats. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 26, 877–882.
Karnick, C.R. (1992) Clinical observation on the effect of composite herbal drugs of Withania
  somnifera, Panax ginseng and Tribulus terrestris on psychomotor performance in healthy volun-
  teers. Indian Medicine, 4, 1– 4.
Kulkarni, R.R., Patki, P.S., Jog, V.P., Gandage, S.P., Patwardhan, B. (1991) Treatment of
  osteoarthritis with herbomineral formulation: a double blind, placebo controlled cross over
  study. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 33, 91–95.
Kulkarni, R.R., Patki, P.S., Jog, V.P., Gandage, S.P., Patwardhan, B. (1992) Efﬁcacy of an
  Ayurvedic formulation in rheumatoid arthritis: A double blind placebo controlled cross over
  study. Indian Journal of Pharmacology, 24, 98–101.
Kulkarni, S.K., George, B. (1995) GABA receptor modulation by herbal preparation (invited
  lecture) International Seminar on Recent Trends in Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ootacamund, 18–20
  Feb. 1995.
Kulkarni, S.K., George, B., Mathur, R. (1998) Protective effect of Withania somnifera root
  extract on electrographic activity in a lithium-pilocarpine model of status epilepticus.
  Phytotherapy Research, 12, 451– 453.
Kulkarni, S.K., George, B., Nayar, U. (1995) Amygdaloid kindling in rats: Protective effect of
  Withania somnifera (Ashwgandha) root extract. Indian Drugs, 32, 37– 49.
Kulkarni, S.K., Sharma, A., Verma, A., Ticku, M.K. (1993) GABA receptor mediated
  anticonvulsant action of Withania somnifera root extract. Indian Drugs, 30, 305–312.
Kumar, P., Kuttan, R., Kuttan, G. (1994) Usefulness of Rasayana as immunomodulators and
  chemoprotectors against cyclophosphamide-induced toxicity. Amala Research Bulletin, 14,
  49–51.
                                                                          Ashwagandha       57
Kuppurajan, K., Rajagopalan, S.S., Sitaraman, R., Rajagopalan V., Janaki, K., Revathi, R.,
  Venkatraghavan, S. (1980) Effect of Aswagandha (Withania sonmnifera Dunal) on the process
  of ageing in human volunteers. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1, 247–208.
Kuttan G. (1996) Use of Withania somnifera Dunal as an adjuvant during radiation therapy.
  Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 14, 854–856.
Nashine, K., Srivastava, D.N., Shani, I. (1995) Role of inﬂammatory mediators in anti-
  inﬂammatory activity of Withania somnifera. Indian Veterinary Medical Journal, 19, 268–288.
Palyi, I., Tyihak, E., Palyi, V. (1969) Cytological effects of compounds isolated from Withania
  somnifera. Herba Hungarica, 8, 73–76.
Panda, S., Gupta, P., Kar, A. (1997) Protective role of ashwagandha in cadmium-induced
  hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity in male mouse. Current Science, 72, 546–547.
Pande, S.B., Sharma, S. (1992) Role of ashwagandha in Sangyabaran (Anaesthesia): an experi-
  mental study. International Seminar-Traditional Medicine, Calcutta, 7–9 November 1992.
Ramarao, P., Rao, K.T., Srivastava, R.S., Ghosal, S. (1995) Effects of glycowithanolides from
  Withania somnifera on morphine-induced inhibition of intestinal motility and tolerance of
  analgesia in mice. Phytotherapy Research, 9, 66–68
Roy, A.S., Acharya, S.B., De, A.K., Debnath, P.K. (1992a) Mountain medicine: Effect of
  Aswgandha (Withania somnifera) on the changes of psychophysiological status of trainee
  mountaineers by altitude gain. International Seminar-Traditional Medicine, Calcutta, 7–9
  November 1992.
Roy, U., Mukhopadhyay, S., Poddar, M.K., Mukherjee, B.P. (1992b) Evaluation of antistress
  activity of Indian medicinal plants, Withania somnifera and Ocimum sanctum with special
  reference to stress-induced stomach ulcer in albino rats. International Seminar-Traditional
  Medicine, Calcutta. 7–9 November 1992.
Sandhya Singh, Sushil Kumar, The Indian Ginseng, Ashwagandha. CIMAP, Lucknow, India 1998.
Sahni, Y.P., Srivastava, D.N. (1993) Withania somnifera: an indigenous anti-ulcerogenic drug.
  Indian Journal of Indigenous Medicine, 10, 53–56.
Sahni, Y.P., Srivastava, D.N. (1994) Anti-inﬂammatory and anti-ulcerogenic activity of Withania
  somnifera. Update Ayurveda 94, Bombay, India. 24–26 November 1994.
Sahni, Y.P., Srivastava, D.N. (1995) Role of inﬂammatory mediators in anti-inﬂammatory
  activity of Withania somnifera on chronic inﬂammatory reactions. Indian Veterinary Medical
  Journal, 19, 150–153.
Saksena, A.K., Singh, S.P., Dixit, K.S., Singh, N., Seth, K., Seth, P.K., Gupta, G.P. (1989)
  Effect of Withania somnifera and Panax ginseng on dopaminergic receptors in rat brain during
  stress. Planta Medica, 55, 95.
Sankara Subramanian, S. (1982) Ashwagandha an ancient Ayurvedic drug. Arogya-Journal of
  Health Science, 8, 135.
Sharada, A.C., Solomon, F.E., Uma Devi, P. (1993a) Toxicity of Withania somnifera root extract
  in rats and mice. International Journal of Pharmacognosy, 31, 205–212.
Sharada, A.C., Solomon, F.E., Uma Devi, P., Srinivasan, K.K., Udupa, N. (1993b) Withaferin
  A and plumbagin. Isolation and acute toxicity studies. Amala Research Bulletin. 13th August
  1993.
Shareef, M.A. (1993) Management of cervical spondylitis through herbal drugs, Withania
  somnifera and Smilax china. A preliminary clinical study. Medicinal Plants: New Vistas and
  Research, 97–101.
Sharma, S., Dahunkar, S., Karandhikar, S.M. (1985) Effects of long term administration of the
  roots of Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) and Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus) in rats. Indian
  Drugs, 23, 133–139.
Sheena, I.P., Singh, U.V., Kamath, R., Uma Devi, P., Udupa, N. (1998) Niosomal withaferin
  A with better antitumour efﬁcacy. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 60, 45– 48.
Shobat, B., Kirson, I., Lavie, D. (1978) Immunodepressive properties of withaferin and
  withanolide D. Biomedicine, 28, 18.
58   Ashwagandha
Shukla, S.P. (1981) Anti-anxiety agent of plant origin. Probe, 20, 201–208.
Singh, N., Nath, R., Lata, A., Singh, S.P., Kohli, R.P., Bhargava, K.P. (1982) Withania
   somnifera (Ashwagandha), a rejuvenating herbal drug which enhances survival during stress
   (an adaptogen). International Journal of Crude Drug Research, 20, 29–35.
Singh, N. et al. (1986) Prevention of urethane-induced lung adenomas by Withania somnifera
   (L) Dunal in albino mice. International Journal of Crude Drug Research, 24, 90–100.
Singh, R.H., Nath, S.K., Behere, P.B. (1990) Depressive illness a therapeutic evaluation with
   herbal drugs. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 11, 1–6.
Singh, R.H. et al. (1979) Studies on psychotropic effect of indigenous drug Ashwaganda
   (Withania somnifera). II. Experimental studies. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, Yoga and
   Homeopathy, 14, 49–54.
Singh, R.H., Murthy, A.R.V. (1989) Medhya rasayana therapy in the management of apsmara
   vis-a-vis epilepsies. Journal of Research and Education in Indian Medicine, 8, 13–16.
Srivastava, K.K. (1995) Adaptogen in high mountains. Indian Journal of Natural Products, 11,
   13–19.
Uma Devi, P. (1996) Withania somnifera Dunal (Ashwagandha), potential plant source of
   promising drug for cancer chemotherapy and radiosensitisation. Indian Journal of Experi-
   mental Biology, 34, 927–932.
Uma Devi, P., Akagi, K., Ostapenko, V., Tanaka, Y., Sugahara, T. (1996) Withaferin A: a new
   radiosensitiser from the Indian medicinal plant Withania somnifera. International Journal of
   Radiation Biology, 69, 193–197.
Uma Devi, P., Sharada, A.C., Solomon, F.E. (1993) Antitumour and radiosensitising effects of
   Withania somnifera (Ashwagandha) on a transplantable mouse tumour, Sarcoma –180. Indian
   Journal of Experimental Biology, 31, 607–611.
Uma Devi, P., Sharada, A.C., Soloman, F.E. (1994) Anticancer potential of ashwagandha roots.
   Update Ayurveda 94, Bombay, India. 24–26 February 1994.
Uma Devi, P., Sharada, A.C., Solomon, F.E., Kamath, M.S. (1992) In vivo growth inhibitory
   effect of Withania somnifera (Ashwagandha) on a transplantable mouse tumour, sarcoma 180.
   Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 30, 169–172.
Venkataraghavan, S., Seshadri, C., Sundersan, T.P., Ravathi, R., Rajgopalan, V., Janaki, K. (1984)
   The comparative effect of milk fortiﬁed with Aswagandha, and Punernava in children: a
   double blind study. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1, 370–385.
Ziauddin, M., Phansalkar, N., Patki, P., Patwardhan, B. (1996) Studies on the immunomodu-
   latory effects of Ashwagandha. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 50, 69–76.
                                                                             Badam     59

10 Badam




    Prunus amygdalus Batsch
    Syn: Amygdalus communis L. var. dulce
    Family: Rosaceae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is a tree of the temperate zone with dry summers, naturalized in the Mediterranean
Basin and is cultivated in Kashmir (India) Baluchistan (Pakistan), Afghanistan, Iran,
Cyprus, Turkey, Spain and California (USA). According to Ayurvedic scholars almond
from Iran is the best and that from the USA is of the lowest quality.
   The plant is a small tree, 5–6 m high, purplish bark, bright green leaves, pale pink
or white ﬂowers. The drupe fruit is ovate, 5 cm long and 2.5 cm broad. Its seed is
brown in colour, 17–15 mm long, 10–13 mm broad, oblong lanceolate and its brown
outer covering can be removed by soaking the seed in water.
   Several varieties of almond are known but broadly it can be classiﬁed into two
varieties, bitter and sweet. Earlier there used to be occasional mixing of bitter almonds
with the sweet one but now it is rare. The bitter almond is poisonous and should be
used for external purposes only. Almond seed kernel is often adulterated with that of
apricot, but the two can be easily differentiated by the small size and different shape
of apricot kernel.
   The seed should be stored, after completely drying them, to avoid the decomposi-
tion of amygdalin and ﬁxed oil. Adding a few cloves to storage bins of almond delays
this decomposition.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

As per the Ayurvedic concept, dry fruits generally provide nutrition and vital energy
to the body. Out of all dry fruits, almond is said to provide maximum beneﬁt. It
suppresses pita and vata. It is oily and causes phlegm so it is harmful to the patients of
rakt pita. Almond should be consumed as per the digestive power of an individual.
During its consumption, if there is a loss of appetite or any other stomach trouble,
then the quantity of almonds should be reduced but it should not be stopped alto-
gether. Do not use almond with honey and hot milk. If honey is to be used, use cold
60   Badam
milk. Almond kernel contains heat sensitive compounds so should not be heated while
making any of its preparations.
   In India, almond is generally considered a nutritive for the brain and nervous
system. It is also said to improve eyesight. In a book on medical secrets of food, it is
mentioned that more than 10,000 Jain monks in Karnataka (India) attribute their
high intellectual level and longevity to the consumption of almond. As per their
concept, the longevity of an individual is neither due to a strong body nor an active
nervous system but due to thin sense ﬁbres (gyantantu) which arise from the brain and
pass through neck. Almond provides nutrition to these sense ﬁbres. The other major
uses of almond are:

As a general tonic
Almond is hard to digest by individuals with weak digestive powers, so the best
method is to soak the almond kernel in water overnight. In the morning separate the
outer brownish seed coat and mash the white kernel in a blender to get a thick milky
paste. In this way, it is easily assimilated into the digestive system and does not cause
indigestion. As a general tonic, to start with, take half a teaspoonful of almond paste,
twice daily in the morning and evening, in a cup of milk, add honey according to
taste. Increase the dose of almond paste everyday until unable to digest it. For addi-
tional effects, for males give 5 g ashwagandha powder and for ladies, 5 g of shatawari
powder, along with the above almond paste. Continue this treatment for 40–60 days.

For delaying premature ejaculation
Soak one almond kernel in water, as above, and form a paste. To this paste add the
powder of 4–5 black peppers, 2 g ginger powder and sugar as per taste. Lick this
mixture, followed by milk for 60 days.

For gaining weight
Eat as much almond as possible for two months, or make a mixture of almond paste
with butter and use along with bread.

For bronchial problems, and strengthening the
male urino-genital system
Take almond kernel, ashwagandha, pippli, in equal quantities, with milk, sugar and honey.

In gynaecological problems
For relief of backache and leucorrhoea, almond is prescribed to women with ashwagandha,
pippali. The paste of bitter almond is applied on generative organs. For women ren-
dered weak after childbirth, a paste of 3–6 almonds should be given every day.

For mentally retarded children
The paste of 3–6 almonds with milk is beneﬁcial if given every day.
                                                                            Badam     61
Almond oil
It is light yellow in colour, with a mild, pleasing odour and a bland taste. It is known
as Roghan Badam in India. It is extracted by a cold process. Adulterations in the oil can
be detected by subjecting it to cold temperature; it is clear at −10°C but congeals at
−20°C. The oil is commonly adulterated or substituted with peach and apricot oil,
and, as a matter of fact, most of the oil sold as bitter almond oil is from the bitter
kernels of apricot. To detect any adulterations, shake 2 parts of oil with one part of
fuming nitric acid and one part distilled water. The mixture should not have any
colour (peach and apricot oil will give a red colour, while sesame and cottonseed oil
will give brown colour) (Culbreth, 1927).
   Sweet almond oil is considered a nutritive, aphrodisiac (increases libido), mild
laxative and is used for relieving headaches. Arabic women massage their breasts with
almond oil after breastfeeding their infants.

Nutritive household preparations

Sardai
It is a cooling drink, made from soaking 2–3 almond kernels, 25 g poppy seed, a few
black peppers and rose petals until soft. Make a paste of these in a blender. Suspend
the paste in 250 ml water and ﬁlter to remove the water-insoluble portion. Ice, honey
or sugar may be added to the drink as per taste (earlier Cannabis leaves were also used
in the mixture). This drink is said to compensate for energy depletion arising from
exposure to summer heat.

Almond nut cream
As a brain tonic, steep in water, orange or lime juice 3 parts almond, 2 parts walnut,
2 parts pine kernel until soft and make a cream in a blender (Nadkarni, 1954).

Nutritive candy balls
Take 100 g each of walnut, almond, poppy seed, melon seed kernel, Trapa bispinosa
powder, with 250 g ghee, 260 g icing sugar, 2 g nutmeg, 1 g saffron, 20–22 carda-
mom seeds. Blanch the almond and other kernels. Wash the poppy seeds and macerate
them in water to form a pulp. Mix this pulp with blanched nuts and roast them in ghee
along with Trapa bispinosa ﬂour, constantly stirring. When the whole mass turns
brown, remove it from the heat, add sugar, followed by powders of nutmeg, saffron
and cardamom. When warm make candy balls by hand.
   It is a good tonic for the brain and physical strength.

Nutritive dessert
Separately soak two teaspoonsful of black beans (Phaseolus mungo), and one of almond
kernel. When soft, remove seed coat and make a paste of both separately. Fry the bean
paste with ghee until brown. Boil it in a cup of milk and, on cooling, add almond paste
and sugar as per taste. Take this preparation for one month. It is specially recommended
for those who use their brain a lot. It provides physical strength to both males and
62   Badam
females for sexual acts, and may be used by diabetics. It also provides desired nutrition
to pregnant women.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

As an anti-inﬂammatory agent
Nagamoto (1988) isolated anti-inﬂammatory and analgesic compounds from almond.
Kubo et al. (1990) tried it on adjuvant-induced arthritis, and the pepsin hydrolysis
product inhibited the acetic acid-induced writhing in mice and cotton pellet-induced
granuloma in rats.

As an immunity booster
Kim et al. (1996) observed that, following oral administration of amygdalin isolated
from almond, it signiﬁcantly increased body weight of rats, along with that of liver
and thymus. Oral administration of amygdalin in non-dose dependent manner sup-
pressed humoral and cell mediated immunity and the high doses increased phagocytic
activity signiﬁcantly.

As an anti-hepatotoxic agent
Matsuda et al. (1990) tried pepsin hydrolysis products of the water soluble portion of
almond in experimental hepatitis. It suppressed the increase of connective tissue in
the liver.

Chemical studies
The seed kernel has 58.9 per cent fat, 20.8 per cent protein, 2.9 per cent minerals,
mainly calcium, phosphorus and iron. Other constituents are oxalic acid, vitamin B
and folic acid. It is one of the richest sources of vitamin E. It has high concentration
of glutamic acid, arginine, asparagine and aspartic acid. Bitter almond has more
protein and less fat. It has 2.5 to 3.5 per cent amygadalin, which after hydrolysis
produces hydrocyanic acid, which is poisonous.

Toxicological studies
The bitter variety contains hydrocyanic acid in its essential oil. About 60 seeds of
these are enough to kill an adult. The sweeter variety contains a very low concentration
of cyanides and hence it is safe.

References
Culbreth, D.M.R. A Manual of Materia Medica and Pharmacology. Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia,
  USA 1927.
Kim, J.H., Kang, T.W., Park, C.B., Cha, K.L., Ahn, Y.K. (1996) Immunobiological studies
  on route of administration of amygdalin. Yak Hoeji, 40, 202–211.
                                                                                Badam     63
Kubo, M., Matsuda, H., Shiomoto, H., Namba, K. (1990) Effect of pepsin hydrolysis product
  of water soluble portion from almond on adjuvant-induced arthritis. Shoyakugaku Zasshi, 44,
  101–117.
Matsuda, H., Shiomoto, H., Nanba, K., Kubo, M. (1990) Effect of pepsin hydrolysis products
  of water soluble portion from almonds on experimental hepatitis. Shoyakugaku Zasshi, 44,
  112–116.
Nadkarni, K.M. Indian Materia Medica. Vol. I Popular Prakashan, Bombay, India 1954.
Nagamoto, N., Noguchi, H., Nanba, K., Nakamura, H., Mizuno, M. (1988) Active compon-
  ents having anti-inﬂammatory activities and analgesic activities from Armeniaceae semen,
  Pruni japonicae semen and almond seeds. Shoyakugaku Zasshi, 42, 81–88.
64    Bala

11 Bala




     Sida acuta Burm. F
     Syn. S. caprinifolia Mast
     S. cordifolia L
     S. grewioides Gvill and Perr.
     S. ovata Forsk.
     S. rhombifolia L
     S. spinosa L
     S. veronicaefolia Lam.
     Syn. S. humilis Cav.
     Family: Malvaceae

On the basis of the detailed literature survey, in addition to the above herbs, it has
been observed that the following plants are also considered to be one or other form of
bala:
   Abutilin indicum Atibala or Kangi in trade
   Sida alba, S. althaefolia, S. alnifolia, S. herbacea, S. lanceolata, S. orientalis, S. retusa, S.
   rotundifolia, and S. rhomboidea.
   Grewia hirsuta, G. populifolia, and G. tenax
   Triumfetta rotundifolia


THE PLANTS AND THEIR DISTRIBUTION

Bala means strength in Sanskrit. Commonly Sida cordifolia (Figs. 5A and B), is con-
sidered the source of this drug. Atibala is deﬁnitely Abutilon (Chunekar and Pandey,
1969). Yellow ﬂowered S. rhombifolia (Figs. 5C and D) is also a strong candidate for
bala while white ﬂowered S. rhomboidea is mahabala, S. veronicaefola syn. S. humilis and
S. spinosa is nagbala (Nag is Sanskrit for snake and also for spine, hence both the
prostate and spiny species come under this category). Grewia hirsuta and G. populifolia
are also considered nagbala by some authors but in trade they are known by the name
Gangeran. Sometimes S. spinosa is further split into two species, S. alba if it has white
ﬂowers and S. alnifolia if it has coloured ﬂowers.
   Some scholars have formed a separate group of ﬁve Sida spp., which they call Panch
bala (ﬁve balas). These are:
                                                                                   Bala   65




 Figure 5 Sida cordifolia: A twig, B seed, S. rhombifolia: C twig, D seed.




Bala                  S.   cordifolia or S. herbacea, S. rotundiﬁola, S. althaefolia
Mahbala               S.   rhomboidea var. rhomboidea
Nagbala               S.   spinosa syn. S. alba and S. alnifolia
Atibala               S.   rhombifolia, S. rhomboidea, S. retusa, and S. orientalis
Bala Phanjivika       S.   caprinifolia Syn. S. acuta and S. lanceolata
Bhumibala             S.   humilis or S. veronicifolia
66    Bala
   Some other scholars on the basis of the number of bala used in a composition, form
different groups, which are as follows:


     Baladivya       Bala and Atibala
     Balatriya       Bala, Atibala and Nagbala
     Balachaturya    Bala, Atibalal, Nagbala, and Mahabala
     Balapanchak     when Bhumibala is added to above four species.


   In commerce the whole herb of Sida spp. is known as Kharanti, and usually no
distinction is made between the various types of bala mentioned above. The seeds of
these are called Beejband and those of Abutilin indicum are called Kanghi.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

Bala is used in the diseases of rakta pitta origin and is considered a healer of all
malfunctions of the body. It is mainly used for following:

As a general tonic
For nervous debility, loss of memory, virility and as an aphrodisiac. In general weak-
ness it is said to protect the inner vital energy of the body ojas and keep away old age.
The herbs are well esteemed for strengthening the urinogenital systems of both males
and females. These help sexual inadequacies and infectious diseases, particularly those
transmitted sexually.

In gynaecological practices
1     In threatened abortion, strengthens placental retention in expectant mothers.
2     As per Ayurvedic concept leucorrhoea in females develops due to weakness in the
      body. One teaspoonful of ﬁne bala powder prescribed twice daily, provides the
      desired strength.
3     In the case of inﬂammation of the ovary, a compound preparation of bala,
      Balaydighrit is given to the mother and to the newborn infant.

In Malaysia, S. veornicaefolia is used as a galactagogue and as an aid for labour parturi-
tion (Lutterodt et al. 1995).

As an anti-inﬂammatory agent
1     For suppuration of boils formed from pus, a poultice of tender leaves is applied to
      the boils. Cold water is sprinkled on occasionally. In this way the boil bursts
      without surgery.
2     The juice of the bark is anti-inﬂammatory and is used in urtica, scorpion sting,
      etc.
                                                                               Bala    67
3   In burning micturition and polyurea, a ﬁne powder of root and seed with ghee and
    sugar reduces inﬂammation.
4   In hoarseness of voice caused by too much cold, singing or crying loudly, half a
    spoon of bala powder with honey clears the throat.
5   The decoction of the root gives relief to alcoholics, who feel dryness of mouth,
    excessive thirst and burning sensation in the throat after consuming alcohol.

As a blood coagulant
In bleeding piles, where blood is passed with faeces and the problem is aggravated by
indigestion and constipation, 10 g of bala powder, boiled with 80 ml of water until
reduced to 20 ml is strained. One cup of mile is added to the ﬁltrate. This mixture is
taken in the morning. It not only helps with haemorrhoids but coagulates blood in the
other parts of the body, such as nose and mouth.

As a stimulant
The ﬂowers of S. acuta and S. rhombifolia are smoked as a stimulant and substituted for
marihuana along the Gulf coastal region of Mexico. Ephedrine has been reported from
these species (Shultes and Hofmann, 1979).

In sexual inadequacies
In males, 5 to 6 g of root powder in the morning on an empty stomach increases the
viscosity of semen and prevents its involuntary discharge. In swollen testes, a decoction
of bala, 4 teaspoons along with 2 teaspoons of castor oil, is prescribed.

Ayurvedic preparations

Bala oil

Method Make a 400 ml decoction of each of bala root, Dashmul (see under amalaki),
barley, Zizyphus fruit, Dolichos biﬂorus seed. Pulverize Tinospora, Pistacia galls, bamboo
manna, Prunus paddam, dry black grapes, Leptadenia reticulata, Glycyrrhiza and any or
all the members of Ashtvarga (see under amalaki), rock salt, Aquillaria agallocha, ole-
ogum resin of Pinus and Cedrus, Rubia cordifolia, Santalum album, Elettaria cardamomum,
Ichnocarpus fruitescence, Hemidesmus indicus, Nardostachys grandiﬂora, aromatic lichens,
Cinnamomum spp. leaves, Valeriana, Asparagus, Withania, dill, Boerhaavia, and take cow’s
milk 4 litre, sesame oil 0.5 litre.
   Make a paste of all the pulverized herbs with decoctions, milk and oil. Boil the
whole mass, until the water evaporates and only the dehydrated oil is left. Filter the
oil.

Use Massaging the body with this oil before taking bath keeps away all the vata
diseases, hastens healing, aids conception and increases sperm count. It makes the skin
healthy and wrinkle free. When used along with other bala preparations, massaging
with this oil fortiﬁes the effect of these preparations.
68    Bala
Baladighrit

Method Make a coarse powder of 500 g each of S. cordifolia root, S. spinosa stem, bark
of Terminalia arjuna, and boil them in 8 litres of water until reduced to about 2 litres.
To this decoction add 750 g ghee, heat again until all the water evaporates and only
fatty matter is left.

Dose One spoonful with sugar twice daily.

Use    For heart problems, dry coughs and the other diseases attributable to vata.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

As an immunomodulator
Out of many plants considered as bala, three plants, Abutilon indicum, Sida rhombifolia,
and S. cordifolia, are preferred. To ﬁnd out which of the three herbs has a Rasayana-like
activity, a comparative study was conducted by Dixit et al. (1978) on these for the
following:

1     Hormonal antibody enhancing response against Salmonella typhi O antigens in
      rabbits.
2     Protective effect against Staphylococcus aureus.
3     Direct antibacterial activity against S. aureus.
4     Immunoglobulin changes in the serum following the administration of herbs.

  Out of these herbs, Abutilon indicum was the most effective for prolonging the life-
span of animals against virulent S. aureus. The gain in body weight was also signi-
ﬁcant. A. indicum did not have any direct antibacterial activity. Its effect was due to
anabolism and immunostimulation of the body systems.

As an adaptogen
In a study, Sharma (1981) used S. spinosa for patients suffering from loss of vigour. There
was a good response to physical and mental conditions, with increases in energy and
weight. It made the patients happy and conﬁdent and increased their digestive power and
appetite, whilst regulating bowel movements. The patients slept well with good dreams.
It helped the proper development of secondary sexual characters and increased libido.

Hormonal effects
Venkitaraman and Radhkrishnan (1976) observed myotrophic and androgenic activity in
the steroidal fraction of the root of S. retusa and S. rhombifolia in castrated rats. Lutterodt
et al. (1995) found that when methanol extract of leaves of S. veronicifolia was admin-
istered to pregnant and non pregnant rats, the extract-induced the release of oxytocin
after 5 minutes of administration but it was not statistically signiﬁcant in pregnant rats.
                                                                                  Bala    69
Anti-inﬂammatory activity
The petroleum ether fraction from A. indicum root had an analgesic effect due to gallic
acid (Bagi et al. 1985), while Lutterodt (1988) noted a muscarine-like activity in
S. veronicifolia.

In poliomyelitis
Nair et al. (1980) observed a positive effect of Sida spp. in chronic cases of poliomyelitis.

As an antibacterial agent
Alcoholic extracts of S. cordifolia, S. rhomboidea and Triumfetta rotundifolia exhibited
antibacterial activity against bacteria (Alam et al. 1991b). In another study by Bhatt
et al. (1985) fatty acids of petroleum ether fraction showed good antibacterial activity
against Staphylococcus aureus and fairly good against Escherichia coli.

Antihepatotoxic activity
The powder and different extracts of the whole plant showed anti-hepatotoxic activity
comparable with silymarin (Rao and Mishra, 1998). Earlier Alam et al. (1991a) studied
the effect of alcohol extracts of S. cordifolia, S. rhomboidea and Triumfetta rotundifolia.
These extracts reduced serum and liver proteins. Muanza (1995) evaluated anticancer
and anti-HIV activities and observed cytotoxic effects in the methanol extract of
S. cordifolia leaves.

Kshirdhara
It is a special treatment, which is carried out by Ayurvedic physicians in the state
of Kerala, south India. In kshirdhara (kshir is milk and dhara is uniform ﬂow of a
ﬂuid) medicated milky emulsion is allowed to fall on the forehead of the patients.
Ramu et al. (1982) treated the patients of anxiety neurosis by subjecting them to this
treatment for 15 days. The authors prepared a decoction by boiling 50 g each of
Glycyrrhiza glabra, Nardostachys grandiﬂora and Sida cordifolia in 6 litres of water,
until the water was reduced to 2 litres. This decoction was mixed with 1.5 litres of
milk. This mixture was poured into a pot with a hole at the bottom, in the centre.
The pot was hung just above the head of the patients, in such a way that the liquid
fell on the forehead. This treatment gave relief to 80 per cent patients of anxiety
neurosis.

Chemical studies
The main compounds reported from the plants used as bala are: asparagine, vascine,
vasicinone, pseudoephedrine, cryptolerine, hypaphorine, phenylethylamine, carboxylated
tryptamines. Saponins and true tannins are absent but pseudotannins, oligosaccharides,
ﬂavonoids, choline, fructsopeptides, histidine glucine, tyrosine, oxalic acid, and phenolic
acids are present (Lutterodt, 1988). Gallic acid is reported by Sharma et al. (1989).
The biological activity of the herb is due to ephedrine and ephedrine-like compounds.
70    Bala
Toxicology
S. cordofolia was non-toxic. LD 50 value was higher than 10 g/kg in rats (Rao and
Mishra, 1998).

References
Alam, M., Joy, S., Ali, U.S. (1991a) Screening of Sida cordifolia Linn., Sida rhombifolia Linn.,
  and Triumfetta rotundifolia Lam. for anti-inﬂammatory and antipyretic activities. Indian Drugs,
  28, 397– 400.
Alam, M., Joy, S., Ali, U.S. (1991b) Antibacterial activity of Sida cordifolia Linn, Sida rhomboidea
  Roxb, and Triumfetta rotundifolia Lam. Indian Drugs, 28, 570–572
Bagi, K., Kalyani, G.A., Dennis J., Kumar, K.A., Kakrani, H.K. (1985) A preliminary phramaco-
  logical screening of Abutilon indicum. I. Analgesic activity. Fitoterapia, 56, 169–171.
Bhatt, D.J., Baxi, A.J., Parikh, A.R. (1983) Chemical investigations of the leaves of Sida
  rhombifolia Linn. Journal of Indian Chemical Society, 60, 98.
Dixit, S.P., Tewari, P.V., Gupta, R.M. (1978) Experimental studies on the immunological
  aspects of Atibala (Abutilon indicum Linn.), Mahabala (Sida rhombifoila Linn), Bala (Sida
  cordifolia Linn.) and Bhumibala (Sida veronicaefolia Lam.). Journal of Research in Indian Medi-
  cine, Yoga and Homoeopathy, 13, 62–66.
Lutterodt, G.D. (1988) Responses of a gastrointestinal smooth muscles preparation to a mus-
  carine principle present in Sida veronicaefolia. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 23, 313–322.
Lutterodt, G.D., Okere, C., Liu C.X., Takashi, H. (1995) Induction of oxytocin release at
  various stages of pregnancy in rats by methanolic extractives of Sida veronicaefolia. Asia Paciﬁc
  Journal of Pharmacology, 10(Supp.), 33–36.
Muanza, D.N., Euler, K.L., Williams, L., Newman, D.J. (1995) Screening for antitumour and
  anti- HIV activities of nine medicinal plants from Zaire. International Journal of Pharmacognosy,
  33, 98–106.
Nair, P.R., Vijayan, N.P., Pillai, B.K.R., Bhagavathy Amma, K.C. (1980) Treatment of
  chronic cases of Saisaveeya vata (Poliomyelitis) II. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha,
  1, 438– 446.
Ramu, K.G., Janakiramiah, N., Sanapati, N.M., Shankara, M.R., Murthy, V.S.N. (1982)
  Ksirdhara on anxiety neurosis (Cittodvega): a pilot study. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and
  Siddha, 3, 126–132.
Rao, K.S., Mishra, S.H. (1998) Antihepatotoxic activity of Sida cordifolia whole plant. Fitoterpia,
  69, 20–33.
Schultes, R.E., Hofmann, A. Plants of the Gods. Healing Arts Press, Vermont, USA 1979.
Sharma, P.V., Ahmed, Z.A., Sharma, V.V. (1989) Analgesic constituents of Abutilon indicum.
  Indian Drugs, 26, 333.
Sharma, S. Rasayana effect of herbs. Sachitter Ayurveda (in Hindi), July, 1981: 27–29.
Venkitaraman, S., Radhakrishinan, N. (1976) Myotrophic and androgenic activities of the
  steroidal fraction isolated from the roots of Sida retusa var. Sida rhombifolia Linn. (Bala).
  Nagarjun, 19, 26–27.
                                                                         Banslochan 71

12 Banslochan




    Syn: Tabashir
    Melocanna bambusoides Trin.

It is a bluish, translucent, silicious concretion. The genuine material is obtained from
the bamboo which was earlier identiﬁed as Bambusa arundinacea Willd., but studies by
Puri (1984) have shown that the real source of banslochan is Melocanna bambusoides Trin.
In this bamboo, the internodal region of the young female plant ﬁlls with sap. This
sap is considered very nutritious and invigorating by inhabitants of the area and is
drunk on exhaustion and for quenching thirst. When the plant matures the sap gets
dried, and deposited inside the nodal region in the form of concretion. These banslochan-
containing bamboo produce a rattling sound with the movement of wind or on shak-
ing, and thus can be easily distinguished from non-concretion-containing plants. The
concretion is collected by splitting bamboo longitudinally. The natural banslochan is
very hard to obtain and is very expensive. It is very commonly substituted by syn-
thetic silica.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYUREVEDA

Tabashir is mainly used for curing diseases of the region under the ribs, such as the
thorax, lungs, intestine, etc. and for debility. It is an ingredient of a number of
polyherbal and polymineral formulations. The common recipe for debility diseases of
infants and young children consists of ﬁne powders of long pepper 1/2 part, cardamom
grain 1/4 part, cinnamon 1/8 part, tabashir 1 part and sugar 2 parts.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

As a nutrient for the bones and the cartilages
Banslochan mainly consists of silica, which is one of the important components of
connective tissue, cartilage, articulation tendons, arterial walls, skin, hair and nails.
It has an effective remineralisation action in painful joints, fragility of the cartilage,
osteoporosis and atherosclerosis. It stimulates the natural defence of the body during
growth, pregnancy, repair of fractures, senescence, etc. Silica helps in calcium ﬁxation
72   Banslochan
by bones and improves the texture of collagen. As soon as the silica level in body
tissue decreases, the calcium level goes up and elasticity is reduced. It helps in the
assimilation of phosphorus for osteoporosis. Silica supplemented bones have 100 per
cent increase in collagen over low silica bones. It is instrumental in faster healing of
bones, and is a component of both the connective tissue and the ﬂuid, which lubricate
the joints. The lubricated joints move friction free, thus lessening the chances of
inﬂammation.

In coronary heart problems
In areas where water contains low silica levels, the incidence of heart diseases are
higher. Levels of silicon in the arterial wall decrease with the development of
atherosclerosis. With silica deﬁciency, the arterial walls become non-elastic and are
unable to accommodate variation in blood pressure.

As an antibacterial agent
Banslochan inhibited the growth of bacteria, probably due to the deposition of silica
on the bacterial cell wall, which may have blocked the passage of nutrients from the
medium into the bacterial body, or may have been due to its interaction with the
proteinaceous cell wall, which produces an effect similar to that of silicosis. A com-
parative study on the binding of tabashir and silicic acid on the bacterial cell wall
showed that in the two cases the nature of binding was similar (Malik and Shakil
Ahmed, 1973).

In hormonal imbalance
Hormonal disturbance in the human organisms is sometimes due to calcium–
magnesium imbalance. Silica can restore this balance.

As an immunostimulant
The skin, aorta and thymus (which activates the immune system) show a marked
reduction in silica as we age. A deﬁciency of silica in the body exposes it to many
diseases and makes it vulnerable to injury.

In degenerative diseases
Silica counteracts the effects of aluminium on the body and thus prevents Alzheimer’s
disease. The regenerative power of silica acts as a biological catalyst for tissues to
regain their tone and elasticity.

Chemical studies
It consists of silicic acid (96.9 per cent), iron, calcium, choline and betaine.
                                                                                Banslochan 73
References
Malik, W.U., Ahmed S. (1973) Studies on the effect of some indigenous drugs (Bhasamas and
  Tabashir) on the growth behaviour of Escherichia coli B. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine,
  8, 35–39.
Puri, H.S. (1983) Medicinal Plants of Tezpur (Assam). Bulletin Medico-Ethno-Botanical Research,
  4, 1–13.
74   Bhalatak

13 Bhalatak




     Semecarpus anacardium L.f.
     Anacardiaceae

It is known as ‘marking nut’ because the black oil contained in the seed’s pericarp was
previously used by washer men for making a permanent identiﬁcation mark on the cloth.


THE TREE AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is a middle sized deciduous tree, growing in the outer Himalayas, and in other
warmer areas of India. Leaves are (Fig. 6A) 20–60 cm long, and 10–30 cm wide.
Flowers are greenish yellow, in terminal panicle. The fruit is (Fig. 6B) 2.5 cm long,
drupe, ovoid, and smooth lustrous black. The oil is highly vesicant. The kernel of the
fruit is almond-like inside, but causes cutaneous eruptions if eaten (Wealth of India,
1972).


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

The seed has Rasayana-like action but has a hot effect. It is considered beneﬁcial for
strength, vigour, vitality, in nervous disorders due to sexual exhaustion and in senile
decay. In Indian medicine it is used in the treatment of arthritis and several other free
radical mediated diseases, facial paralysis and in sciatica. Its continuous use combats
ageing and those who have used it have wrinkle-free skin and black hair. It is consid-
ered so important that in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh, in a village near Faizabad,
a special fair called Bhela ka Mela is held, in which patients of various diseases are
treated with this nut (Ahmed et al. 1993). The nut is not used as such but is miti-
gated, or treated using various methods to reduce the toxicity, as follows:

Puriﬁcation of Bhalatak
Before puriﬁcation the nuts are immersed in water. The fruits which sink are kept for
processing, whilst ﬂoating ones are discarded. The juice from the pericarp is very
corrosive, so precaution is taken so that the seed does not touch any part of body. The
nuts, after removal of the crown, are mixed with a ﬁne powder of bricks in a cotton
bag. These are rubbed against brick powder until they are scraped enough to release
                                                                         Bhalatak    75




    Figure 6 Semecarpus anacardium A twig, B seed.



the vesicant oil. When the brick powder has absorbed all the oil, the seeds are washed
in hot water.
   In Kerala, a state in south India, the nuts are ﬁrst crushed to separate the kernels.
These are then immersed in cow’s urine for three days. During the day the seeds are
taken out and exposed to sun. After this treatment for three days, the kernels are
boiled in a decoction of Terminalia bellirica and then in a solution of cow dung, before
being dried and washed with rice gruel (Shanvaskhan et al. 1997).
   If blisters are formed during handling of the nut, they may be treated with the juice
of Amaranthus polygamous, or a paste of Terminalia chebula or sesame seed in butter or
milk. Alternatively a paste of macerated almond and coconut oil or coriander seed may
76    Bhalatak
be used or the juice of the leaves of Cassia tora or C. ﬁstula. If poisonous symptoms develop
during the administration of this seed, the patient is given a decoction of T. chebula or
Sesamum indicum along with seed powder of Embelia ribes (Shanavaskhan et al. 1997).

Methods of using Bhalatak as Rasayana without toxicity
(Vaidya, 1998).
1     Fill seven earthen pots with soil in which 1 kg of pounded bhalatak are mixed and
      fenugreek grown in it. For irrigation do not use pure water but a decoction, made
      from 3 kg of crushed nuts. In winter, when the fenugreek crop is ready, cook and
      eat the leaves of one pot daily. Continue this for seven days. During the treatment
      spices and pepper should be avoided but bitters and a bit of salt may be used. This
      fenugreek is hot in effect, so hot spicy, non-vegetarian food and sexual intercourse
      should be avoided
2     Take 35 kg of nuts, after crushing them, use them as manure in a quarter acre of
      land to cultivate fenugreek. Eat the fresh leaves as salad for three months. Do not
      cook them. Radish can be grown in place of fenugreek and eaten raw.
3     Remove the crown from one marking nut and heat it in 25 g of butter until
      smoke starts coming out of it. Make an omelette with this butter. Discard both
      the nut and omelette but use the butter for vitality.
4     Remove the crown from 1 kg of nuts and boil them in 20 litres of milk. Separate
      the cream of the milk and make butter from it. Take about 3 g of this butter
      every day. To provide strength to the sexual organs massage them with this
      butter.
5     Boil one crushed bhalatak nut in 16 times water, until water is reduced to half.
      Measure the quantity of decoction obtained, add eight times as much milk to it
      and boil it again until the whole mass is condensed to half. Lubricate the mouth
      and throat with butter and swallow 12–25 g of this milk.
6     For acute inﬂammation arising from an accident, take one processed bhalatak, fry
      it in ghee, make halwa (porridge) and eat as much as possible.

External applications
For cracking soles and feet, an ointment is applied which is made by boiling bhalatak
seed with rosin, bees wax and sesame oil.
   When the body is massaged with bhalatak oil, it makes a person immune to all
kinds of skin diseases and it turns grey hair black.

Ayurvedic preparations

Bhalatak Rasayana

Method Pulverize equal quantities of ginger, Embelia ribes, processed iron, and bhalatak.

Dose 1 g with ghee and honey for three months.

Use    It increases blood, strength, youth and vigour. Use with care in anaemic patients.
                                                                            Bhalatak    77
Bhalatakadi Modka

Method Pulverize equal quantities of bhalatak, haritaki and sesame seed, mix these
powders in raw sugar as per taste and make small candy balls.

Dose and Use As in Bhalatak Rasayana.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

In various types of cancer
The extracts of the fruit were effective against human epidermoid carcinoma of the
naso-pharynx. Oral administration of nut juice to cancer patients, particularly those
suffering from mouth cancer, provided symptomatic relief. It also extended the sur-
vival time (Wealth of India, 1972). Anti-tumour activity of the chloroform soluble
fraction was tested on a spectrum of experimental neoplasms. The fraction showed
a signiﬁcant increase in percent lifespan of leukaemia L12120, P388 resistant either
to adriamycin and/or vincristine (Chitnis et al. 1980). The cytotoxic effects of acetylated
oil on P388 lymphocytic leukaemia cell was tested in vitro. The oil inhibited biosynthesis
of DNA, RNA and protein (The oil was acetylated because pure oil gets oxidized
easily) (Phatak, 1983). Smit et al. (1995) conﬁrmed the strong cytotoxic effect of the
nut, which may be of use in cancer. Premlatha et al. (1997) studied the effect of
Anacardium nut milk extract on hepatocellular carcinoma. A marked increase in liver
peroxide livels and a concomitant decrease in enzymatic antioxidant levels were
observed in rat liver cancer. Tripathi et al. (1998) studied the effect of this drug on the
cell cycle and cell viability of transformed prostate cells. The plant extract signiﬁ-
cantly arrested the cell cycle. At higher concentrations, it affected cell viability. The
response was dose dependent.

As an anti-inﬂammatory agent
The alcoholic extract of the nut protected the animals against electrically-induced
convulsions but was not effective against chemical convulsions. An extract from the
nut, containing catechin and epicatechin, helped in sciatica and was effective in
ankylostomiasis. Catechin increased capillary resistance. When studied for inﬂamma-
tion, epicatechin produced a signiﬁcant reduction in rat paw oedema (Mujumdar,
1977). Upadhyay et al. (1986) used the drug for anti-inﬂammatory and anti-arthritic
effects. Of patients given 5–10 g bhalatak twice daily, 40 per cent showed complete
remission, 20 per cent showed improvement and the rest minor effects. It also helped
body pain, appetite, indigestion and the haemoglobin content in patients’ blood.
Sharma and Singh (1986) conducted a clinical trial of a preparation Amrita Bhallataka
on patients suffering from rheumatoid arthritis. A signiﬁcant symptomatic relief was
seen with less need for analgesics.
   A Siddha preparation Serankottai Nei made from the milk extract of the nuts, said
to have a good anti-arthritic effect, was studied by Vijayalakshmi et al. (1996, 1997).
After administering this preparation, the lysosomal enzyme activity and protein-bound
78   Bhalatak
carbohydrate component levels became signiﬁcantly normal. It was effective at a dose
of 150 mg/kg in rats with adjuvant-induced arthritis. The lysosomal membrane fragil-
ity of drug-treated animals was reduced.

Hypocholesterolic effect
The nut shell extract is hypocholesterolaemic in its action and prevents cholesterol-
induced atheroma (Sharma et al. 1995).

Chemical studies
Major constituents are mono- and di-hydroxycatechols and tannins. The vesicant juice
is rich in phenols (Thakur et al. 1989).

Toxicological studies
Many people are sensitive to it and after its consumption may pass darker urine with
or without blood. There may be skin eruptions, itching, hot ﬂushes, diarrhoea and
even delirium. To counteract these side effects, the tender kernel of coconut fruit or fat
and butter should be given.

References
Ahmed, A., Rahman, H.S.Z., Amin, K.M.Y., Khan, N.A. Evaluation of Baladur (Semecarpus
  anacardium) on the basis of literature and folk information. Proceedings Ist National Seminar on
  Ilmul Advia, Beenapura, India, 23–25 April 1993.
Chitnis, M.P., Bhatia, K.G., Phatak, M.K., Kesava Rao, K.V. (1980) Antitumour activity of
  the extract of Semecarpus anacardium L. nuts in experimental tumour models. Indian Journal of
  Experimental Biology, 18, 6–8.
Mujumdar, A.M. (1977) Central nervous system actions of Semecarpus anacardium Linn. Journal
  University of Poona, Science and Technology, 50, 147–150.
Phatak, M.K., Ambaya, R.Y., Indap, M.A., Bhatia, K.G. (1983) Cytotoxicity of the acetylated
  oil of Semecarpus anacardium Linn. Indian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology, 27, 166–170.
Premlatha, B., Muthulakashmi, V., Vijayalakshmi, T., Sachanandam, P. (1997) Semecarpus
  anacardium nut extract-induced changes in enzymic antioxidants studied in aﬂatoxin B1
  caused hepatocellular carcinoma bearing Wistar rats. International Journal of Pharmacognosy,
  35, 161–166.
Shanavaskhan, A.E., Binu, S., Unnithan, M.D., Santhoshkumar, E.S., Pushpagandan, P. (1997)
  Detoxiﬁcation techniques of traditional physicians of Kerala, India, on some toxic herbal
  drugs. Fitoterapia, 68, 69–74.
Sharma, A., Mathur, R., Dixit, V.P. (1995) Hypocholesterolemic activity of nut shell extract of
  Semecarpus anacardium (Bhilawa) in cholesterol fed rabbits. Indian Journal of Experimental
  Biology, 33, 444–448.
Sharma, A.K., Singh, R.H. (1986) A clinical study on Amrita Bhallataka as a Naimittika
  Rasayan in the mangement of rheumatoid arthritis (amvata). Rheumatism, 21, 51–60.
Smit, H.F., Woerdenbag, H.J., Singh, R.H., Meulenbeld, G.J., Labadie, R.P., Zwaving, J.H.
  (1995) Ayurvedic herbal drugs with possible cytostatic activity. Journal of Ethnopharmacology,
  47, 75–84.
Thakur, R.S., Puri, H.S., Akhtar Hussain (1989) Major Medicinal Plants of India. Central
  Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Lucknow, India 1989.
                                                                                Bhalatak     79
Tripathi, Y.B., Tripathi, P., Reddy, M.V.R., Dutt, S., Tewari, D.S., Reddy, E.P. (1998) Effect
  of Semicarpus anacardium on the cell cycle of DU-145 cells. Phytomedicine, 5, 383–388.
Upadhyay, B.N., Singh, T.N., Tewari, C.M., Jaiswal, L.C., Tripathi, S.N. (1986) Experimental
  and clinical evaluation of Semecarpus anacardium nut (Bhallatak) in the treatment of Amavata
  (rheumatoid arthritis). Rheumatism, 21(3), 70–87.
Vaidya, A.R. The Ancient Indian System of Rejuvenation and Longevity. Indian Book Center, Delhi,
  India 1998.
Vijayalakshmi, T., Muthulakshmi, V., Sachdanandam, P. (1996) Effect of the milk extract of
  Semecarpus anacardium nut on adjuvant arthritis: a dose dependent study in Wistar albino
  rats. General Pharmacology, 27, 1223–1226.
Vijayalakshmi, T., Muthulakshmi, V., Sachdanandam, P. (1997) Effect of milk extract of
  Semercarpus anacardium nuts on glycohydrolases and lysosomal stability in adjuvant arthritis
  in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 58, 1–18.
Wealth of India: Raw materials. Vol IX. Council of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research, New
  Delhi, India 1972.
80   Bhringraj

14 Bhringraj




     Eclipta prostrata L. Syn. E. alba (L.) Hassk.
     Family: Asteraceae (Compositae)


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

Bhringraj grows wild alongside streams in hot areas and on humid soil. It is an erect
or prostate herb (Fig. 7A), leaves 2.5 to 7.5 cm, with white hairs. Floral heads are 6–
8 mm in diameter, solitary and white. Seed is black in colour, achene and compressed.
   It is often called white bhringraj or white bhangra to differentiate it from another
plant Wedelia calendulacea Less. (Fig. 7B) which has yellow ﬂowers and is also known as
yellow bhangra. Whereas E. alba grows all over the country W. calendulacea is found
only in some parts of east and south India (Bhargava and Seshadri, 1974). A brief
account of W. calendulacea is given in the end of this chapter.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

For digestive problems
Bhringraj is used as an antihepatotoxic agent and for spleen enlargement. Root is
emetic and purgative. In jaundice 20 g of fresh leaves with 7 black peppers are
administered daily for 5–6 days.

For gynaecological problems
The herb is used to prevent abortion and miscarriage. It gives relief in cases of uterine
pains and uterine haemorrhage, after the delivery.

As an antiinﬂammatory agent
The paste of the herb is applied externally as an antiinﬂammatory agent. Decoction of
the plant is used as a tonic for arthritis.

For cold
Juice of the herb with honey is used for catarrh in children.
                                                                          Bhringraj 81




    Figure 7 A Eclipta alba twig, B Wedelia calendulacea twig.




For hair growth
An oil made with leaf juice, boiled with sesame or coconut oil, is used for hair growth,
delaying premature greying of hair and headaches.

For healing wounds
The fresh plant or its juice is applied for toothache. It is considered an antiseptic and
applied to ulcers and wounds in cattle. The pounded plant is used to stop bleeding.
82   Bhringraj
As a Rasayana
It is considered a medhya (nervine tonic) and a Rasayana. The seed (1 to 3 g) is used as
an aphrodisiac. The juice (5–10 ml) is prescribed for one month as a part of Rasayana
treatment. While administering the juice, the patient should survive only on milk.

In Chinese traditional medicine
It is used as an astringent for various types of haemorrhages, for example of the
intestine (the vomiting of blood), haematuria, lumbago, epistaxis, cystitis and hepatitis.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATION AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Antihepatotoxic activity
Samana and Ramaswamy (1976) conﬁrmed the protective effect of the herb against
liver damage in dogs. Dixit and Achar (1979) tried a ﬁne powder of herb for infective
hepatitis. In 75 per cent cases there was recovery. In another study Dixit and Achar
(1981) tried the powder of 50 mg/kg of the herb in 3 doses for jaundice in children
and in the majority of cases it showed complete clinical and biochemical recovery in 1
to 5 weeks. It was concluded that this antihepatotoxic activity may be due to the anti-
viral and anti-microbial activity of the herb. Devinder Kumar et al. (1981), through
biochemical and histopathological studies, observed that the aqueous extract, equiva-
lent to 5 g of dry herb, regularized liver abnormalities caused by carbon tetrachloride.
Dube et al. (1982) used 50 mg of the extract three times a day for hepatocellular
jaundice. It cured 55 per cent cases of jaundice within 3– 4 weeks of treatment.
Thyagarajan et al. (1982) observed immunoactive property in Eclipta against the surface
antigen of hepatic B-virus. Wagner et al. (1986) detected coumestans as the active
principle. Eclipta, when tried against various ailments of liver and gall bladder, exhib-
ited signiﬁcant stimulatory effects on liver cell enlargement. Raut et al. (1986) studied
the effect of the herb on peptic ulcers, non-ulcer dyspepsia and the liver. When given
along with Indian thyme (Ptychotis ajwain DC) a cholagogue property was observed in
patients with derangement of the liver and gall bladder. Kumar and Tripathi (1987)
also tried the herb for managing liver diseases. Chandra et al. (1987) studied the effect
of herb on inﬂammation and liver injury and found that it counteracted liver weight
and hepatic lipid peroxidation. Alcoholic extract using 50 mg/kg once a day for 7 days
was found to be antihepatotoxic (Mogre et al. 1988). Singh et al. (1993) and Murthy et
al. (1993) also found a hepatoprotective effect. Lin (1996) observed a hepatoprotective
effect in an extract of herb against carbon tetrachloride, acetaminophen and beta-
D-galactosamine-induced liver damage.
   Premilla (1995) reviewed the antihepatotoxic activity of the herb.

Antihaemorrhagic activity
Kosuge et al. (1981) studied antihaemorrhagic principles of herb for homeostatic
action.
                                                                           Bhringraj 83
Cardiovascular effect
Gupta et al. (1976) observed cardiovascular (cardiodepressant) activity in it when used
for hepatic congestion, venous enlargement and turgidity. The water soluble fraction
of the leaves produced a hypotensive effect unrelated to histaminergic and cholinergic
mechanism. The polypeptide mixture had a tranquillizing effect. It induced rapid onset
of pentobarbitone sodium’s hypnotic activity. The average sleeping time was almost
doubled by a crude extract dose of 2.5 mg/kg. Hypotensive effect was immediate and
it lasted for 10–15 minutes. When clinical trials were undertaken using a decoction
from 25 g of powder daily for 3 weeks, 73 per cent of hypertensive patients showed a
good response. There were no headaches, insomnia or palpitations but urine output
increased. Rashid et al. (1992) also observed antihypertensive activity in ethanol extract.
The active constituent detected was culumbin.

In ulcers
Tewari (personal communication, 1979) tried 10 g of whole plant powder three times
a day on 35 patients with non-ulcer dyspepsia and 25 patients with peptic ulcer
dyspepsia for 3 months. A complete symptomatic relief in epigastric pain, nausea
and vomiting was seen. There was a reduction in ﬂatulence and the amount of free
gastric acid. Eighty per cent of the patients of non-ulcer dyspepsia responded well,
with relief in acid secretion, nocturnal pain, nausea and vomiting. In 48 per cent of
patients with duodenal ulcer the results were excellent while in 75 per cent of cases
there was radiological improvement. Raut et al. (1986) tried the herb for ulcers and
peptic ulcers. Das (1992) studied the effect of the herb on gastritis by administering
12 g of pulverized herb daily, in three divided doses, for 45 days. In 52 per cent of
cases of gastritis the results were excellent. In hyperchlorhydria there was total relief.

Antiinﬂammatory effect
Reddy et al. (1990) observed that Eclipta exhibited anti-inﬂammatory activity. It
inhibited the higher levels of histamine due to chronic inﬂammation by 58.67 per
cent.

Antivenomous effect
Melo et al. (1994) tested the aqueous extract of the herb and the three constituents,
wadelolactone, stigmasterol and sitosterol, for protective effects against three crotalid
venoms and three crotalid myotoxins. All the herbal preparations inhibited the myotoxic
effects of the snake venom. Wadelolactone was an effective antagonist of the myotoxins.
The aqueous extract and wadelolactone also inhibited haemorrhagic lesions.

Antimicrobial property
The alcohol extract had anti-viral activity. Polyacetylenes of the herb, in antibiotic
tests, were strongly phototoxic (UV mediated) to microorganisms. A Chinese study
has also shown that thiophenes in the herb are phototoxic to bacteria, fungi, nema-
todes and yeast.
84    Bhringraj
Chemical studies
The main constituent is wadelolactone, a complex coumarin, alkaloid, with nicotine
0.08 per cent and nicotinic acid. The root contains polyacetylenes substituted thiophene
derivatives and free triterpenoids.

Toxicological studies
In acute and sub-acute toxicity the behaviour of rats was normal, but in chronic
toxicity they become dull and lethargic. The water intake was reduced and they were
indifferent to their surroundings. There were no appreciable changes in the body
weight of organs. No side or toxic effects were observed after the study of biochem-
ical parameters and histopathology of liver, kidney, spleen and heart (Rashid et al.
1992).

Wedelia calendulacea Less
As mentioned earlier, Eclipta is sometimes substituted by this herb. The chemical and
pharmacological studies have shown that this substitution is appropriate, as both have
the same types of chemical constituents and effect.
   In this herb coumestans was found to be the main active principle for liver protec-
tion (Wagner 1986). Sharma et al. (1989) noted that 50 per cent alcohol extract of the
herb had a heptoprotective effect. It protected the functional and structural activity of
the liver. Gopalkrishnan et al. (1989) also observed anti-hepatotoxic activity in it.
It counteracted the increase in liver weight, hepatic liver peroxidation and serum
alkaline phosphates induced by carbon tetrachloride. Hegde et al. (1994) noted that
herb had a wound healing effect on rats.

References
Bhargava, K.K., Seshadri, T.R. (1974) Chemistry of medicinal plants: Eclipta alba and Wedelia
  calandulacea. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, 9, 9–15.
Chandra, T., Sadiqui, J., Somasundram, S. (1987) Effect of Eclipta alba on inﬂammation and
  liver injury. Fitoterapia, 58, 23–32.
Chow, L.-S., Jung, Y.-C., Ching, L.-C., Yunho L. (1996) Hepatoprotective activity of Taiwan
  folk medicine: Eclipta prostrata Linn. against various hepatotoxins-induced acute hepatotoxicity.
  Phytotherapy Research, 10, 483– 496.
Das, S. (1992) Effect of Eclipta alba on gastritis. International Seminar-Traditional Medicine,
  Calcutta, 7–9 November 1992.
Dixit, S.P., Achar, M.P. (1979) Bhringraja (Eclipta alba L) in the treatment of infective hepatitis.
  Current Medical Practice, 23, 237–242.
Dixit, S.P., Achar, M.P. (1981) Study of Bhringraja (Eclipta alba) therapy in jaundice in
  cholera. Journal of Scientiﬁc Research in Plants and Medicine, 2, 96–100.
Dube, C.B., Devendkumar, Srivastava, P.S. (1982) A trial of Bhringraja Ghansatva on the
  patients of Kostha-Shakaraista-Kamala (with special reference to hepatocellular jaundice).
  Journal National Integrated Medical Association, 24, 265–269.
Gopalakrishnan, S., Sadique, J., Chandra, T. (1989) Antihepatotoxic activity of Wedelia
  calendulacea in rats. Fitoterapia, 60, 456– 459.
Gupta, S.C., Bajaj, U.K., Sharma, V.N. (1976) Cardiovascular effect of Eclipta alba (Hassk.)
  Bhringraja. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy, 11, 91–92.
                                                                                 Bhringraj 85
Hegde, D.A., Khosa, R.L., Chansuria, J.P.N. (1994) A study of the effect of Wedelia calendulacea
   Less on wound healing in rats. Phytotherapy Research. 8, 439– 440.
Kosuge, T. et al. (1981) Studies on anti-haemorrhagic principles in the crude drug for
   hemostatics: on hemostatic activity of the crude drugs for hemostatics. Yakugaku Zasshi,
   101, 501–503.
Kumar, D., Dube, C.B., Srivastava, P.S. (1981) Controlled experimental study of Bhringraja
   Ghansatva. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 2, 32– 41.
Kumar, S., Tripathi, S.N. (1987) Role of certain Ayurvedic medicines in the management of
   liver disease. Journal of the National Integrated Medical Association, 29, 7–14.
Melo, P.A., Nascimento, M.C., Mors, W.B., Suarez-Kurtz, G. (1994) Inhibition of the myotoxic
   and hemorrhagic activities of crotalid venoms by Eclipta prostrata (Asteraceae) extracts and
   constituents. Toxicon (Oxford) 32, 595–603.
Mogre, K., Vohra, K.K., Seth, U.K. (1988) Protective effect of Picrorrhiza kurroa and Eclipta alba
   on Na+. K+ Atphase in hepatic injury by hepatotoxic agents. Indian Journal of Pharmacy, 13,
   253–259.
Murthy, T.S., Rao, B.G., Satyanaryana, T., Rao, R.V.K. (1993) Hepatoprotective activity of
   Eclipta alba. Journal of Research and Education in Indian Medicine, 12, 41– 43.
Premilla, M.S. (1995) Emerging frontiers in the area of hepatoprotective herbal drugs. Indian
   Journal of Natural Products. 11, 9.
Sharma, A.K., Anand, K.K., Pushpangadan, P., Chandan, B.K., Chopra, C.L., Prabhakar, Y.S.,
   Damodaran, N.P. (1989) Hepatoprotective effects of Wedelia calendulacea. Journal of
   Ethnopharmacology, 25, 93–102.
Singh, B., Saxena, A.K., Chandan, B.K., Agarwal, S.G., Bhatia, M.S., Anand, K.K. (1993)
   Hepatoprotective effect of ethanolic extract of Eclipta alba on experimental liver damage in
   rats and mice. Phytotherapy Research, 7, 154–158.
Rashid, M.D., Karim, V., Ahmed, M., Choudhury, A.R. (1992) Antihypertensive activity of
   Eclipita alba. International Seminar-Traditional Medicine, Calcutta, 7–9 November, 1992.
Raut, A.A., Tewari, S.K., Kumar, S. (1986) Eclipta alba – a scientiﬁc appraisal with special
   reference to its effect on peptic ulcer, non-ulcer dyspepsia and liver. Journal of NIMA, April
   1986, 17–23.
Reddy, K.R.K., Tehara, S.S., Goud, P.V., Alikhan, M.M. (1990) Comparison of the
   antiinﬂammatory activity of Eclipta alba (Bhangra) and Solanum nigrum (Mako Khushk) in
   rat. Journal of Research and Education in Indian Medicine, 9, 43– 46.
Samana, H.C., Ramaswamy, V.M. (1976) Protective effect of Eclipta alba in experimentally
   induced liver damage in dogs. Cheiron, 5, 96–98.
Thyagarajan et al. (1982) In vitro activation of Hb. Ag by Eclipta alba Hassk and Phyllanthus
   niruri. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 76, 124–130.
Wagner, H., Geyer, B., Kiso, Y., Hikino, H., Rao, G.S. (1986) Coumestans as the main active
   principles of the liver drugs Eclipta alba and Wedelia calendulacea, Planta Medica, 5, 370–374.
86   Bhuiamla

15 Bhuiamla




     Phyllanthus amarus Aschum. & Thonn.
     P. debile Klein ex. Willd
     P. fraternus Webster
     P. niruri L
     P. urinaria L
     P. virgatus Forst, Syn. P. simplex Retz.
     Family: Euphorbiaceae


THE PLANTS AND THEIR DISTRIBUTION

The plant species given above are called bhuiamalaki in Ayurveda because the leaves in
these have a superﬁcial resemblance to those of the amalaki (Emblica ofﬁcinalis) tree and
the small fruits in these prostate herbs grow along the soil. Bhuiamalaki thus means a
prostate amalaki and the corrupted form of this name is bhuiamla.
   The herb is probably a native of tropical America. In nearly all the earlier literature,
the herb bhuiamla was identiﬁed as Phyllanthus niruri and it is reported as such in most
of the Indian ﬂoras, but recent studies have shown bhuiamla to be a mixture of at least
three species: P. amarus, P. fraternus, and P. debilis. There is a possibility that other
allied species are identiﬁed as bhuiamla. The true P. niruri is endemic to the West
Indies and has not been found to occur in India (Thakur et al. 1989). P. debilis is
conﬁned to the coastal areas of India, while the other two species are widespread
throughout the plains. The other species which can be considered as the source of
bhuiamala is P. maderaspatensis (Singh et al. 1994). Keeping in view the medicinal
importance of this genera, studies were carried out in the allied species. In P. urinaria
there were signiﬁcant differences amongst the intraspeciﬁc accessions. Accessions of
P. amarus from various locations were not signiﬁcantly different (Unander and Blumberg,
1991).
   Herbal Phyllanthus species (Fig. 8) are small annual, creeping or erect plants, growing
in moist, shady places in most parts of India. Leaves are elliptic oblong, obovate oblong
or obtuse, varying in different species. Flowers are axillary, unisexual or bisexual.
Capsules are round and vary in shape and size. All these species are characterized by
the fruits growing along the underside of the leaves
   The four important species of Indian Phyllanthus spp. growing in the plains of India,
on the basis of a dichotomous key given by Bagchi et al. (1992), can be identiﬁed as
follows:
                                                                     Bhuiamla 87




    Figure 8 Phyllanthus amarus herb.


1   Plants prostate and parenchymatous cells are full of starch grains    P. virgatus
2   Plants erect and parenchymatous cells have few or no starch grains            3/4
3   Capsule verrucose and ﬁber cells are not present in branchlets       P. urinaria
4   Capsule smooth and ﬁber cells are present in branchlets                       5/6
5   Cymules bisexual, calyx lobes 5, druse crystals are present            P. amarus
6   Cymules unisexual, calyx lobes 6, druse crystals are absent          P. fraternus


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

It is considered bitter, astringent, stomachic and a febrifuge.
   The uses of this herb are:
88   Bhuiamla
In jaundice
Fifteen grams of the crushed herb with a cup of milk is given in the morning and
evening. Dry leaves, in powder form, may also be prescribed (Nadakarni, 1954).
   For jaundice in Silent Valley (Kerala), 10 g of this herb, with 10 g of the root bark
of Cassia auriculata L. is made into paste and administered with cow’s milk for three
days, on an empty stomach in the morning (Bhatt et al. 1981).


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

According to Bagchi et al. (1992) much of the earlier botanical, phytochemical and
pharmacological work previously reported from India on P. niruri was apparently done
on P. fraternus, P. amarus or P. debilis. The summary of these ﬁndings is as follows:

Immunomodulator activity
The crude extract, as well as the red pigment of the herb, had immunoactivating
ability against HBsAg (Thakur et al., 1989).

Effect on the liver
Children suffering from jaundice were given the herb in powder form. In the majority
of cases, hepatic tenderness disappeared with improvement in appetite (Dixit and
Achar, 1983). It also helped in alcohol-induced fatty liver development (Umarani et al.
1985) and was used in jaundice due to liver damage by Shyamsunder et al. (1985). The
effect of alcohol-induced liver cell damage in non-hepatectomised rats was studied by
Agarwal et al. (1986). It protected induced cytotoxicity in primary cultured hepatocytes
and also provided protection against cytotoxicity induced by lead, aluminium salts
(Dhir et al. 1990) and by nickel chloride (Agarwal et al. 1992). P. niruri was found
effective in induced hepatotoxicity in calves (Kohale et al. 1993). According to Satyan
et al. (1994) both P. niruri and P. urinaria, provided protection to the liver due to a
major bioactive lignan, phyllanthin. P. urinaria lacked phyllanthin, so the protective
effect was less in this case. For comparison, Sane (1995) studied the hepatoprotective
effect of both P. amarus and P. debilis on the liver by bringing about a change in the
various constituents of serum by carbon tetrachloride. P. debilis was more potent than
P. amarus. Polya et al. (1995) found that hydrolyzable tannins from P. amarus were the
most speciﬁc potent inhibitors of the rat cyclic AMP dependent protein kinase catalytic
sub unit.
   Effect on Hepatitis B virus: This study is important because a relationship between
hepatoma and hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection exists. Deﬁnite immune inactive
properties of Phyllanthus against the surface antigen of hepatitis B virus was reported
by Thygarajan et al. (1982). These authors (Thygarajan et al. 1988) observed that
P. amarus clears the chronic state of the B virus. Venkateswaran et al. (1987) studied
the effect of an extract of P. niruri on hepatitis B and woodchuck hepatitis viruses. It
inhibited woodchuck hepatitis virus DNA polymerase and surface antigen expression.
Jayaram et al. (1987) also conﬁrmed anti-hepatitis B virus properties of this herb after
                                                                             Bhuiamla 89
clinical trials. The treatment was found quite safe, with no mortality, weight loss or
behavioural changes. Jayram et al. (1997) treated 28 chronic cases of HBV by using
P. amarus, for up to three months. Clearance was observed in 20 per cent of cases. The
study proposed a dose of 500 mg of the herb three times a day for six months. Munshi
(1993) found this herb a good agent for post exposure prophylaxis in neonatal duck
hepatitis B virus (DHBV) infection. Milne (1994) standardized the extract of P. amarus
to contain 200 mg of geraniin. The results indicated that this extract had no effect on
New Zealand hepatitis B carriers. Alonso et al. (1995) tried an alcohol extract of
Phyllanthus spp. and the ﬂavonoids of the herb inactivated the surface antigen in vitro
in HBV. Unamder et al. (1995), after a review, concluded that the herb has some use
as an anti-viral agent to treat jaundice and liver diseases. It acted as a liver tonic in the
case of non-hepatitis B virus diseases. The effects on chronic infection with HBV or
related viruses have generally been negative. Ott et al. (1997) observed that P. amarus
suppresses hepatitis B virus by interrupting interactions between HBV enhancer I
and cellular transcriptase factors. Jayaram et al. (1997) carried out clinical trials on
the patients of acute viral hepatitis A, B, and non-A, and non-B. After four weeks,
signiﬁcant biochemical and clinical normalcy in hepatic virus A infected patients was
observed. It seemed to accelerate the clearance of the majority of HBV patients. Karin
(1999) isolated seven ellagitannins from P. urinaria, which had strong activity against
Epstein Barr virus.

Antidiabetic effect
Hukeri et al. (1988) conﬁrmed hypoglycaemic activity of P. fraternus in rats.
Sivaprakasam et al. (1995) tried P. amarus in 25 diabetic patients. Statistically signi-
ﬁcant lowering of blood sugar levels was observed with a dose of 1 g, thrice daily for
three months. Srividya and Periwal (1995) observed diuretic, hypotensive and
hypoglycaemic effects of the herb. Blood glucose was signiﬁcantly reduced without
any side effects. It also lowered the cystolic blood pressure in non-diabetic, hypertens-
ive females. Moshi et al. (1997) conﬁrmed non-insulin dependent hypoglycaemic activity
in P. amarus.

Effect on fat metabolism
The herb caused increased depletion of triglycerides, cholesterol and phospholipids found
in liver, heart and kidney and brought them down to normal levels (Umarani, 1985).

Effect on vascular system
An angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor from P. niruri was isolated (Ueno et al.
1988). Endothelin is a potent vasoconstrictor peptide and could be involved in the
development of hypertension in man. A non-peptide endothelial antagonist has been
reported from P. niruri (Hussain, 1995).

Anti-bacterial property
Cruz (1994) observed that a hexane fraction of P. urinaria leaves have an antibacterial
effect. Unander (1995) conﬁrmed it.
90   Bhuiamla
Anti-nociceptive activity
This activity was observed from an extract of the herb. It failed to inhibit formalin-
induced paw oedema (Santos et al. 1995).

Antioxidant property
Three compounds isolated from P. niruri, were six times more potent than quercitin
for inhibiting aldose reductase (Shimizu et al. 1989). P. niruri caused a 50 per cent
inhibition of superoxide scavenging activity, and potent inhibition of lipid peroxide
formation. It was a scavenger of hydroxyl radical in vitro, which shows it to be a good
antioxidant ( Joy and Kuttan, 1995).

Anti-spasmodic activity
P. urinaria extract had a relaxant effect on isolated trachea (Paulino et al. 1996).

Anti-fungal activity
This activity of the herb against Helminthosporium sativum and Alternaria alternata has
been reported (Thakur et al. 1989).

Chemical studies
Many lignanas have been isolated from various species. Phyllanthin is a major bioact-
ive lignan but it is absent in P. urinaria (Satyan et al. 1994). Five ﬂavonoids, four
leucodelphins and two alkaloids have also been reported. (Thakur et al. 1989). From
the alcoholic extract of P. niruri Ueno et al. (1988) isolated ellagic acid, gallic acid and
geraniin. These exhibited angiotensin converting enzyme activity.

References
Agarwal, K., Dhir, H., Sharma, A., Talukdar, G. (1992) The efﬁcacy of two species of Phyllanthus
  in counteracting nickel clastogenicity. Fitoterapia, 63, 49–54.
Agarwal, S.S., Garg, A., Agarwal, S. (1986) Screening of Phyllanthus niruri Linn and Riccinus
  communis Linn on alcohol-induced liver cell damage in non-hepatectomised rats. Indian
  Journal of Pharmacology, 18, 211–214.
Alonso, G.D.B., Perez, O.C., Chevalier, P. (1995) In vitro inactivation of Ags HB by plant
  extracts of Phyllanthus genus. Revista Cubana de Medicina Tropical, 47, 127–130.
Bagchi, G.D., Srivastava, G.N., Singh, S.C. (1992) Distinguishing features of medicinal herba-
  ceous species of Phyllanthus occuring in Lucknow District (U.P.) India. International Journal
  of Pharmacognosy, 30, 161–168.
Bhatt, A.V., Nair, K.V., Nair, C.A.A. (1981) Ethnobotanical studies in the Silent Valley and
  the adjoining areas. Bulletin of Medico-Ethno-Botanical Research, 3, 153–161.
Chandra, T., Sadique, J. (1987) A new recipe for liver injury. Ancient Science of Life, 7, 99–103.
Cruz, A.B., Moretto, E., Cechinel Filho, V, Niero, R., Montanari, J.L., Yunes, R.A. (1994)
  Antibacterial activity of Phyllanthus urinaria. Fitoterapia, 65, 461– 462.
Dhir, H., Roy, A.K., Sharma, A., Talukdar,G. (1990) Protection afforded by aqueous extracts
  of Phyllanthus species by lead and aluminum salts. Phytotherapy Research, 4, 172–176.
Dixit, S.P., Achar, M.P. (1983) Bhunyamlaki (Phyllanthus niruri) and jaundice in children.
  Journal National Integrated Medical Association, 25, 269–272.
                                                                                    Bhuiamla 91
Hukeri, V.I., Kalyam, G.A., Kakrani, H.K. (1988) Hypoglycaemic activity of ﬂavonoids of
   Phyllanthus fraternus in rats. Fitoterapia, 59, 68–70.
Hussain, R.A., Dickey, J.K., Rosser, M.P., Matson, J.A., Kozlowski, M.R., Brittain, R.J.,
   Webb, M.L., Rose, P.M., Fernandes, P. (1995) A novel class of non-peptidic endothelin
   anatgonists isolated from the medicinal herb Phyllanthus niruri. Journal of Natural Products,
   58, 1515–1520.
Jayaram, S., Thyagarajan, S.P., Panchanadam, M., Subramanian, S.S. (1987) Anti-hepatitis B
   virus properties of Phyllanthus niruri Linn. and Eclipta alba Haussk: in vitro and in vivo
   safety studies Biomedicine, 7, 9–16.
Jayaram, S., Thyagarajan, S.P., Sumathi, S, Manjula, S., Malathi, S., Madangopalan, N. (1997)
   Efﬁcacy of Phyllanthus amarus treatment in acute viral hepatitis A, B, and non A and non B:
   an open clinical trial. Indian Journal of Virology, 13, 59–64.
Jayaram, S., Valliammai, T., Thyagrajan, S.P., Pal, V.G., Jayaraman, K., Madangopalan, N.
   (1990) Study on HBV markers in chronic HbsAg carriers while on treatment with Phyllanthus
   amarus using ELISA and DOT biohybridisation method VIR 3. XIV National Congress of the
   Indian Association of Medical Microbiologist, Vellore, TN, October 25–27, 1990.
John, G., Krishnamurthy, S. (1993) Some biochemical effects of Phyllanthus niruri: an ayurvedic
   drug for hepatitis in rats. Medical and Nutritional Research Communication, 1, 40–46.
Joy, K.L., Kuttan, R. (1995) Anti-oxidant activity of selected plant extracts. Amala Research
   Bulletin. 15, 68–71.
Karin, C.S., Liu, C., Lin, M.-T., Lee, S.-S., Faen, C.J., Ren, S., Lien, E.J. (1999) Antiviral
   tannins from two Phyllanthus species. Planta Medica, 65, 43– 46.
Kohale, K.N., Bijwal, D.L., Patnaik, B.S., Sadekar, R.D., Moele, S.G. (1993) Efﬁcacy of
   Phyllanthus niruri Linn in experimentally induced hepatotoxicity in crossbred calves. Indian
   Journal of Veterinary Medicine. 13, 16–17.
Milne, A., Lucas, C.R., Waldon, J., Foo, F. (1994) Failure of New Zealand hepatitis B carriers
   to respond to Phyllanthus amarus. New Zealand Medical Journal, 107, 243.
Moshi, M.J., Uiso, F.C., Mahunnali, R.L.A., Malele, S.R., Swai, A.B.M. (1997) A study of
   the effect of Phyllanthus amarus extract on blood glucose in rabbits. International Journal
   of Pharmacognosy, 35, 167–173.
Munshi, A., Mehrotra, R., Panda, S.K. (1993) Evaluation of Phyllanthus amarus and Phyllanthus
   maderasptensis as agent for post exposure prophylaxis in neonatal duck hepatitis B virus
   infection. Journal of Medical Virology, 40, 53–58.
Nadkarmi, K.M. Indian Materia Medica, Vol. I. Popular Prakashan, Bombay, India 1954.
Ott, M., Thygarajan, S.P., Gupta, S. (1997) Phyllanthus amarus suppresses hepatitis B virus by
   interrupting interactions between HBV enhancer I and cellulose transcriptase factors. European
   Journal of Clinical Investigations, 27, 908–915.
Paulino, N., Cechinel Filho, V., Yunes, R.A., Calixto, J.B. (1996) The relaxant effect of
   extract of Phyllanthus urinaria in the guinea-pig isolated trachea. Evidence for involvement
   of ATP-sensitive potassium channels. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 48, 1158–
   1163.
Polya, G.M., Wang, B.H., Foo, L.Y. (1995) Inhibition of signal regulated protein kinases by
   plant derived hydrolysable tannins. Phytochemistry, 38, 307–314.
Prakash, A, Satyan, K.S, Wahi, S.P., Singh, K.P. (1995) Comparative hepatoprotective activity
   of three Phyllanthus species, P. urinaria, P. niruri and P. simplex on carbon tetrachloride-
   induced liver injury in the rat. Phytotherapy Research, 9, 594–596.
Reddy, B.P., Murthy, V.N., Venkateshwarlu, V., Kokate, C.K., Rambhau, D. (1993) Antihepato-
   toxic activity of Phyllanthus niruri, Tinospora cordofolia and Ricinus communis. Indian Drugs, 30,
   338–341.
Sane, R.T., Kuber, V.V., Chalissery, M.S., Menon, S. (1995) Hepatoprotection by Phyllanthus
   amarus and Phyllanthus debilis in Ccl4-induced liver dysfunction. Current Science 68, 1243–
   1246.
92    Bhuiamla
Santos, A.R.S., Cechinel Filho, V., Yunes, R.A., Calixto, J.B. (1995) Further studies on the
   antinociceptive action of the hydroalcoholic extracts from plants of the genus Phyllanthus.
   Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 47, 66–71.
Satyan, K.S., Nand Prakash, Singh, R.P., Wahi, S.P. (1994) Chemical and hepatoprotective
   activity of Phyllanthus Linn. Species; Family: Euphorbiaceae. Proceedings of 46th Annual Indian
   Pharmaceutical Congress. Chandigarh, 28–30 December 1994.
Shimizu, M., Horie, S., Terashima, S., Ueno, H., Hayashi, T., Ariswa, M, Suzuki, S., Yoshizaki,
   M. Morita, N. (1989) Studies on aldose reductase inhibitors from natural products II. Active
   components of a Paraguayan crude drug Para-parai mi, Phyllanthus niruri. Chemical and
   Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 37, 2531–2532.
Shyamsunder, Kodakandla Venkata, Bikram Singh, Raghunath Singh Thakur, Akhtar Hussain,
   Yoshunobu Kiso, Hiroshi Hikino (1985) Anti-hepatotoxic principles of Phyllanthus niruri
   herb. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 14, 41– 44.
Singh, R.T., Sharma, A., Handa, S.S. (1994) Standardisation of Phyllanthus amarus Schum. & Thonn.
   Proceedings of 46th Annual Indian Pharmaceutical Congress, Chandigarh, 28–30 December 1994.
Sivaprakasam, K., Yasodha, R., Sivandanam, G., Veluchamy, G. (1995) Clinical evaluation of
   Phyllanthus amarus Schum & Thonn in diabetic mellitus. Seminar on Research in Ayurveda and
   Siddha CCRAS, New Delhi, 20–22 March 1995.
Somanabandhu, A., Nityangkuras, S., Mahidol, C., Ruchirawat, S., Likhit-wityayawind, K.,
   Shieh, H., Chai H., Pezznto and Cordell, G.A. (1993) 1H and 13C NMR assignment of
   phyllanthin and hypophyllanthin. Lignans that evidence cytotoxic response with cultured
   multi drug resistant cells. Journal of Natural Products, 56, 233–239.
Srividya, N., Periwal, S. (1995) Diuretic, hypotensive and hypoglycaemic effect of Phyllanthus
   amarus. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 33, 861–864.
Thakur, R.S., Puri, H.S., Hussain, A. Major Medicinal Plants of India. Central Institute of
   Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Lucknow, India 1989.
Thyagrajan, S.P. (1982) In vitro inactivation of Hb, Ag by Eclipta alba Haussk and Phyllanthus
   nirurri. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 76, 124–130.
Thyagarajan, S.P., Jayaram, S., Satyasekaran, M., Madangopalan, N. (1990) Efﬁcacy of Phyllanthus
   amarus v/s Essentiale in acute viral hepatitis. VIR 5. XIV National Congress of the Indian
   Association of Medical Microbiologists, Vellore, TN. October 25–27, 1990.
Thyagarajan, S.P., Subramanian, S., Thirunalasundri, T., Venkateswaran, P.S., Blumberg, B.S.
   (1988) Effect of Phyllanthus amarus on chronic carriers of hepatitis B virus. Lancet, II
   (8614), 764–766.
Tripathi, S.C., Patnaik, G.K., Visen, P.K.S., Saraswat, B., Kulshreshtha, D.K., Dhawan, B.N.
   (1992) Evaluation of hepatoprotective activity of Phyllanthus amarus against experimentally
   induced liver damage in rat. Proceedings of 25th Indian Pharmacological Society Conference,
   Muzzafarpur, Bihar, India. 5–8 December 1992.
Ueno, H., Horie, S., Nishi, Y., Shogwa, H., Kawasaki, M., Suzuki, S., Hayashi, T., Arisawa
   M., Shimizu, M., Yoshizaki, M., Morita, N., Bergenza, L.H., Ferro, E., Bagua, Wo, I.
   (1988) Chemical and pharmaceutical studies on medicinal plants in Paraguay, geraniin an
   angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor from Paraparai Mi Phylanthus nirurui. Journal of
   Natural Products, 51, 357–365.
Umarani, D., Devaki, T., Govindraju, P., Shanmugasundram, K.R. (1985) Ethanol-induced
   metabolic alternations and the effect of Phyllanthus niruri in their reversal. Ancient Science of
   Life, 4, 174–180.
Unander, D.W., Blumberg, B.S. (1991) In vitro activity of Phyllanthus (Euphorbiaceae) species
   against the DNA polymerase of hepatitis viruses: effect of growing environment and inter
   and intra-speciﬁc differences. Economic Botany, 45, 225–242.
Unander, D.W., Webster, G.L., Blumberg, B.S. (1995) Usage and bioassays in Phyllanthus
   (Euphorbiaceae). IV Clustering of antiviral uses and other effects. Journal of Ethnopharmacology,
   45, 1–18.
                                                                                Bhuiamla 93
Venkateswaran, P.S., Millman, I., Blumberg, B.S. (1987) Effect of an extract of Phyllanthus
  niruri on hepatitis B and woodchuk hepatitis viruses: in vitro and in vivo studies. Proceedings
  National Academy of Sciences USA, 84, 274–278.
Zhibao, M., Shan, C.H., Xitan, Z., Wu, S.X., Zhuang, L., Xioming, W. (1995) Duck hepatitis
  B virus model for screening of antiviral agents from medicinal herbs. Chinese Medical Journal,
  108, 660–664.
94   Brahmi

16 Brahmi




     Bacopa monnieri (L.) Penn.
     Syn. Herpestis monniera (L.) H.B.K.
     Bacopa monniera Wettst.
     Moniera cuneifolia Michx.
     Family: Scorphulariaceae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is a small prostate herb (Fig. 9A,B) with ascending branches and serrate, entire,
oblong or obovate, 2.5 long and 0.6 cm wide leaves. The ﬂower is solitary and the
fruit is an ovoid capsule with persistent style. The plant grows in damp places and
marshy grounds on the majority of the Indian plains.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

Earlier Centella asiatica was known as brahmi to distinguish it from Centella; it is known
in the trade as jal brahmi (brahmi growing along water) or jal neem (neem is Azadirachta
indica and this herb is as bitter as neem, so it was called hygrophytic neem). Even now
Centella is sometimes used in place of this herb.
   The literal meaning of brahmi is which expands consciousness. According to Hindu
mythology Brahma is one of the three gods of trinity, who controlled the world during
its origin. The other names of this herb in ancient texts are: Sureshta – liked
by gods, Divy – divine, Saraswati, Sharad, Bharati – goddesses of learning (the herb is
named after these goddessess to show that it has a good effect on intellectuality),
Vayastha – arrests old age, Sharma – charming and Medhya – good for mental work.
   It is one of the three medhya herbs of Ayurveda, used for psychoactive diseases. It has
a beneﬁcial effect on intelligence and memory by reducing anxiety and tension. It is
considered a nervine tonic for neurasthenia, epilepsy, insanity and for nervous break-
down. For learning and memory up to 30 ml of plant juice is given twice daily before
breakfast in the morning and two hours after dinner. It is quite bitter so honey is
added to it to make it palatable.
                                                                         Brahmi 95




    Figure 9 Bacopa monniera A twig, B dry herb.



THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Psychotropic effects
To conﬁrm the identity of brahmi, Singh et al. (1975) studied the therapeutic activ-
ities of both Centella and Bacopa and concluded that Bacopa was the source of brahmi.
This herb showed signiﬁcant psychotropic action as evidenced by excessive sleep and
conformation changes in the brain, as well as in the blood. A signiﬁcant barbiturate
hypnosis potentiation effect was observed, with reductions in the acetylcholine and
cholinesterase content of the brain tissue and the blood.
   Earlier studies had shown that the herb’s alkaloid brahmine resembled strychnine in
its stimulating action but was less toxic (Chopra et al. 1955). Deshpande and Lalta
96   Brahmi
Prasad (1978) observed sedation and nembutal hypnosis effect in the herb, which
showed better effects than Luminal. It did not produce dizziness, nausea or vomiting
and could be used for cardiac patients. When tried by Nair et al. (1976) on patients of
tubercular meningitis, it could not prevent convulsions but reduced the severity and
hastened recovery in the post-convulsive stage. To study its effect on memory, Dey
et al. (1976) observed that this herb produced maximum improvement during maze
learning by albino rats. Singh et al. (1979) observed an anti-anxiety effect in the
alcoholic extract of the herb. The saponins showed a signiﬁcant barbiturate potentiation
effect. It was effective in anxiety neurosis after one month of treatment (Singh and
Singh, 1980). There was signiﬁcant relief in symptoms and quantitative reduction in
the level of anxiety. It had an adaptogenic effect also. Khanna and Ahmed (1992) used
the herb in the treatment of epilepsy and postulated that it acted through β-adrenergic
receptors. Martis et al. (1992) experimented with the aqueous and alcoholic extracts of
the herb. The extracts did not produce sedation or muscle incordination and they had
no anti-depressant action. Singh and Dhawan (1994) carried out pre-clinical neuropsy-
chopharmaceutical investigations on the active constituents of the herb bacoside. It
was found to be nootropic and a memory enhancer. Dar and Channa (1997) observed
a complete relaxant effect with the alcohol extract of the herb. Vohora et al. (1997)
isolated a new triterpene bacosine from the herb, which was opioidergic in nature. It
exhibited moderate analgesic effects. For the study of anxiolytic activity, the standard-
ised extract of the herb was compared with lorazepam, a benzodiazepine anxiolytic
agent. The standardised extract produced a dose related anxiolytic activity, which, in
certain respects was better than lorazepam (Bhattacharya and Ghoshal, 1998).
   Abhang (1993) tried a herbal preparation containing Bacopa on the intelligence
quotient of 10–13 year old boys. The preparation caused a statistically signiﬁcant
increase in intelligence. A polyherbal preparation Brahmi rasyana containing Bacopa,
clove, long pepper and cardamom seed showed anti-inﬂammatory activity ( Jain et al.
1994) comparable to that of indomethacin. This preparation may act by interfering
with prostaglandin synthesis and by stabilizing the lysosomal membrane.

Anti-cancerous activity
The ethanol extract exhibited anti-cancerous activity in Sarcoma 180 cell culture
(Elangovan et al. 1995). Kiri and Khan (1996) tested the active constituents for
genotoxic activity and no chromosomal aberration was observed.

Antioxidant effect
The alcohol extract of the herb had an antioxidant effect, which showed protection
against lipid peroxidation. The memory enhancing, mild sedative effects as well as
relief in epilepsy and insomnia of this herb may be due to this antioxidant activity
(Tripathi et al. 1996).

Chemical studies
Earlier brahmine, hespestine and a mixture of three alkaloids were isolated but the
therapeutic activity of the herb has been found to be due to saponins, bacosides A
and B.
                                                                                    Brahmi 97
  A preparation containing these bacosides has been commercialized as a memory
enhancer.

References
Abhang, R. (1993) Study to evaluate the effect of a micro (suksma) medicine derived from
   brahmi (Herpestis monierra) on students of average intelligence. Journal of Research in Ayurveda
   and Sidha, 14, 10–21.
Bhattacharya, S.K., Ghoshal, S. (1998) Anxiolytic activity of a standardised extract of Bacopa
   monniera: an experimental study. Phytomedicine, 5, 77–82.
Chopra, R.N., Nayar, S.L., Chopra, I.C. Glossary of Indian Medicinal Plants. Council of Scientiﬁc
   and Industrial Research, New Delhi, India 1955.
Dar, A., Channa, S. (1997) Relaxant effect of ethanol extract of Bacopa monniera on trachae, pul-
   monary activity and aorta from rabbits and guinea pigs. Phytotherapy Research, 11, 323–325.
Deshpande, P.J., Lalta Prasad (1978) Role of indigenous drugs as preanaesthetic agents. Journal
   of Research in Indian Medicine, Yoga and Homoeopathy, 13, 1–8.
Dey, C.D., Bose, S., Mitra, S. (1976) Effect of some centrally active phyto products on maze
   learning of albino rats. Indian Journal of Physiology and Allied Sciences, 30, 88–97.
Elangovan, V., Govindasamy, S., Ramamoorthy, N., Balasubramanian, K. (1995) In vitro
   studies on the anticancer activity of Bacopa monnieri. Fitoterapia, 66, 211–215.
Jain, P., Khanna, N.K., Pendse, V.K., Godhwani, J.L. (1994) Antiinﬂammatory effects of an
   Ayurvedic preparation, Brahmi rasayana in rodents. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 32,
   633–636.
Khanna, T. Ahmad, B. (1992) Some beta adrenergic activity of saponins derived from ethanolic
   extract of Bacopa monniera. Proceedings of Conference on Trends in Molecular and Cellular Cardi-
   ology, Lucknow. 4–5 May, 1992.
Kiri, A.K., Khan, K.A. (1996) Chromosome aberrations, sister chromatid exchange and
   micronuclei formation analysis in mice after in vivo exposure to Bacoside A and B. Cytologia,
   6, 99–103.
Martis, G., Rao, A., Karanth, K.S. (1992) Neuropharmacological activity of Herpestis monniera.
   Fitoterapia, 63, 399–404.
Nair, V., Sadanand, S., Athavalo, V.B. (1976) “Brahmi” as an anticonvulsant: trials in rats and
   in patients with tuberculous meningitis. Pediatric Clinics India, 11, 246–252.
Singh, H.K., Dhawan, B.N. (1994) Pre-clinical neuro-psychopharmacological investigations
   on bacosides: A nootropic memory enhancer. Update Ayurveda 94. Bombay, India, 24–26
   February, 1994.
Singh, R. H., Singh, L. (1980) Studies on the anti-anxiety effect of the Medhya rasayna drug,
   Brahmi (Bacopa monniera Wettst ). Part I. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1, 133–
   148.
Singh, R.H., Singh, L., Sen, S.P. (1979) Studies on the anti-anxiety effect of the Medhya
   rasayana drug Brahmi (Bacopa monniera Linn). Part II. Experimental studies. Journal of
   Research in Indian Medicine, Yoga and Homoeopathy, 14, 1–6.
Singh, R.H., Sinha, A.N., Pandey, H.P. (1975) A comparative study on the psychotropic
   action of the Medhya drugs, Brahmi (Bacopa monniera) and Mandukaparni (Hydrocotyl asiatica).
   Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, 10, 108–110.
Tripathi, Y.B., Chaurasia, S., Tripathi., E, Upadhyaya, A., Dubey, G.P. (1996) Bacopa monniera
   Linn as an anti-oxidant mechanism of action. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 34, 523–
   526.
Vohora, S.B., Khanna, T., Athar, M., Bahar Ahmed (1997) Analgesic activity of bacosine, a
   new triterpene isolated from Bacopa monnieri. Fitoterapia, 68, 361–365.
98   Chitrak

17 Chitrak




     Plumbago zeylanica L.
     Syn: P. rosea L.
     P. capensis Thunb.
     P. indica L.
     Family: Plumbaginaceae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It grows in arid zones in most parts of India throughout the year. It is a wild growing
herb (Fig. 10) and may be up to 1 metre tall. The stem is dark brown externally and
white internally. Its leaves are 3 cm or so wide and about 5 cm long, deciduous in
summer but with leaves in rainy season. Flowers are white with a pink tinge, or sky
blue in colour but the white ﬂowers are common and the coloured ones are rare.
   The root is blackish brown, knotted with horny fracture. It tastes pungent and
bitter, causing a tingling sensation. Fresh roots have been advised but usually the dry
ones are used. In south India (Shanavaskhan, 1997) the roots are detoxiﬁed before use
by treating chopped root pieces repeatedly with fresh lime water. With this treatment,
the root turns red ﬁrst, but with repeated washing the red colour fades away. In
another method, root pieces are boiled in dilute cow dung solution. (The fresh root
acts as a vesicant and cause inﬂammation and blisters. If this happen, an antidote of
5 g of Asparagus root with 200 ml of drinking yogurt is given.)


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

As a Rasayana
Plants with sky blue ﬂowers (Plumbago capensis) are preferred for this purpose.
The root is dried, powdered and administered for one month with milk or water. It is
said to impart a long disease-free life. It delays greying of hair, increases strength,
intelligence and bestows beauty.
                                                                          Chitrak   99




    Figure 10 Plumbago zeylanica A twig, B dry root.




For indigestion
As per Ayurveda, this herb is considered pungent, hot, and said to increase the
body’s digestive ﬁre (agni) manyfold. It stimulates the liver and spleen and is an
antidote to the undesirable metabolites produced (ama) during digestion. Therefore
it is prescribed in all diseases which arise from a disturbed digestive system, includ-
ing those caused by microbes and worms. For digestive problems, a paste of the
root made with water is heated in ghee and prescribed. A mixture of powders of
equal parts of Plumbago root, rock salt, long pepper and Terminalia chebula is also
used.
100 Chitrak
For liver problems
In hepatotoxicity due to chronic fever and in enlargement of liver and spleen, it is
prescribed with yogurt.

For loose motions
In diarrhoea, dysentery and gastroenteritis, it is prescribed with Embelia ribes and
Cyperus scariosus.

For chronic skin diseases
It is prescribed in the second stage of leprosy and syphilis.

In gynaecological practices
It causes the contraction of the uterus and may cause abortion.

Ayurvedic preparation

Shaddharna yoga

Method Pulverize equal parts of Plumbago zeylanica, Wrightia tinctria seed, Stephania
hernandifolia, Picrorhiza kurrooa, Aconitum heterophyllum and Terminalia chebula.

Dose 25 g.

Use   For ﬂatulence.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Hypolipidaemic and antiatherosclerotic effects
The active constituent plumbagin increased the faecal excretion of cholesterol and
phospholipids (Purushothaman et al. 1985). It prevented the accumulation of choles-
terol and triglycerides in liver (Sharma et al. 1991).

Anti-tumour property
Chitrak showed the regression of experimental tumours (Purushothaman et al. 1985)
due to plumbagin, which had a growth inhibitory and radiosensitizing effect on
experimental mouse tumours. Uma Devi et al. (1994) observed that the extract of the
herb signiﬁcantly reduced tumour glutathione content. The results were better when
lower doses of the herb were used with radiation and hyperthermia.
                                                                              Chitrak    101
Hormonal effect
Plumbagin has strong antiprogestational, antifertility activity (Dhar et al. 1995).

Chemical studies
Mainly naphthaquinone derivatives like plumbagin have been reported.

Toxicological studies
In large doses, the herb is a narcotic. It causes dryness of mouth, nausea, diarrhoea
and numbness of skin. In pregnant women it causes a burning sensation, bleeding,
contraction and miscarriage. The active constituent, plumbagin, was studied for its
sub-acute toxicity. It did not show any histopathological change or toxicity within
the prescribed dose (Purushothaman et al. 1985). The oral administration of the
above, 1,250 mg/kg of ethanol root extract, in rat and mice produced severe diarrhoea.
In sub-acute studies when 50 mg/kg of the extract was injected daily for 30 days, no
mortality was observed but there was no weight gain in the treated rats (Emerson
Solomon, 1993). Another extract was toxic at 100 mg/kg (Ganasoundari et al. 1997).

References
Dhar, S.K., Rao, P.G. (1995) Hormonal proﬁle of plumbagin. Fitoterapia, 66, 442– 446.
Emerson Solomon, F., Sharda, A.C., Uma Devi, P. (1993) Toxic effects of crude root extract of
  Plumbago rosea (Rakta chitraka) on mice and rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 38, 79–84.
Ganasoundari, A., Zare, S.M., Uma Devi, P. (1997) Modiﬁcation of bone marrow radiosensitivity
  by medicinal plant extracts. British Journal of Radiology, 70, 599–602.
Purushothaman, K.K., Mohana, K., Susan, T. (1985) Biological proﬁle of plumbagin. Bulletin
  Medico Ethnobotanical Research, 6, 177–188.
Shanavaskhan, A.E., Binu, S., Unnithan, M.D., Santhoshkumar, E.S., Pushpagandan, P. (1997)
  Detoxiﬁcation techniques of traditional physicians of Kerala, India on some toxic herbal
  drugs. Fitoterapia, 68, 69–74.
Sharma I., Gusain D., Dixit V.P. (1991) Hypolidaemic and antiatherosclerotic effect of
  plumbagin in rabits. Indian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology, 35, 10–14.
Uma Devi, P., Emerson Solomon, F., Sharada, A.C. (1994) In vivo tumour inhibitory and
  radiosensitising effects of an Indian medicinal plant, Plumbago rosea, on experimental mouse
  tumours. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 32, 523–528.
102 Chuara

18 Chuara




    Phoenix dactylifera L
    Family: Palmae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

The plant mainly grows in Iraq and the other Arabian countries. It has unbranched,
erect, tall, cylindrical stem, up to 20 m tall, crowned by long pinnate, fronds, from
which spikes may arise. The other species, P. sylvestris, is found throughout drier parts
of India but the fruit in this case has thinner pulp.
   In India, the fresh mature fruit is known as khajur or pind khajur, while the dry
form is called chuara. Fruits of chuara are up to 5 cm long, about 1 cm thick,
cylindrical with slightly broad base, tapering towards the stalk end, brownish and
wrinkled. The dry pulp, which is leathery and sweet, encloses the stone. The dry date
palm is considered auspicious in marriage ceremonies and is given with milk on the
nuptial night. It is considered essential for some religious functions. In Muslims, if the
real date palm is not available, they make a sweetmeat with fat, sugar, and wheat
ﬂour in the shape of date palm and call it chuara, for breaking the fast of Ramdzan.
Mahatama Gandhi used date palm soaked in water, for breakfast as part of his diet.
The Indian date has the same but inferior effect.
   In Indian commerce, three grades of dry date palm are recognized:

1. Sakariya (sugary) from Iraq and Muscat. It is considered the best.
2. Chupchap from Basra (Iraq). It is intermediate in quality.
3. Zharakhlati. It is of inferior grade.

USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA
It is considered cooling in effect. (There is controversy amongst Ayurvedic scholars
about the nature of the date. Some of them consider it to be hot in effect while others
argue, since it is consumed by the people of hot areas (Arab deserts), if it had a hot
effect it would not have been possible for Arabs to digest this fruit.)
   The other uses of date palm fruits are:
                                                                           Chuara 103
As a general tonic
It is a demulcent, expectorant, nutrient, emetic, laxative, aphrodisiac, good for heart
and satisfying (keeps contented). It increases vital ﬂuids, strength and is pre-
scribed for tuberculosis, gastroenteritis, dryness of mouth, coughs, respiratory diseases,
unconsciousness, diseases due to alcoholism, asthma, chest complaints, fevers and
gonorrhea. It is given wherever there is a loss of vital body energy, for general weak-
ness, high blood pressure and fatigue. For physiological strength 10–15 pieces of
dates (or as per the digestive capacity of an individual), should be chewed slowly,
followed by milk. It not only makes the body strong but gives the skin a lustrous
and healthy look. It prevents premature greying of hair and wrinkle formation. It
probably has an anabolic and hormonal effect on the body. It increases vital energy
so is given to physically weak children, adults and expectant mothers for strength,
as follows.
   I. Boil 25 g date pulp in 250 ml milk, until the pulp is soft. Both the date and
milk are consumed. Some people add a pinch of saffron to milk before boiling it.
   II. In the morning, when the stomach is empty, and before sleep in the evening,
take two dry dates daily for the ﬁrst two weeks, increase the dose to three in the third
week and four pieces in the fourth week onwards. Do not eat more than four dates at
one time. Follow this regime for at least three months. After this period boil dates in
milk before use.

For infants
During teething trouble, date is given to infants for chewing. It hardens the gums and
is also a mild laxative.

For sexual weakness
Remove the stone from date, replace with 4–5 pieces of saffron and tie the fruit with
thread in such a way that saffron does not escape from inside. Boil the date in 250 ml
of milk until it is reduced to half. Macerate the date in this condensed milk and
discard milk-insoluble part. Drink by chewing the milk slowly. It invigorates the
sexual systems of both sexes.

For asthma
Chew two dry dates in the morning every day. It gives strength to the lungs, and the
body becomes immune to cold and allergies.

For colds
After two days of a cold attack, take four pieces of fresh date. Boil the minced pulp of
these dates with four seeds of black pepper and one cardamom in 250 ml of milk.
After brisk boiling, add one teaspoon of ghee. Chew and swallow the contents and
drink the milk afterwards. This preparation not only cures colds, but if used for 3–4
nights, it helps headaches, heavy heads, dry coughs, lethargy, mild fever and loss of
appetite.
104 Chuara
Ayurvedic preparation

Cold drink
Date has been considered as an antifatigue and a thirst quencher. In Ayurvedic work
Sarangdhara a recipe for a cold drink made from the infusion of equal parts of date,
dry pomegranate seed (sour variety which grows wild in the western Himalayas), black
grape, fruit of Grewia asiatica, tamarind, with salt and spices as per taste, is mentioned.

Chemical studies
The fruit contains protein (1.2 per cent), fat (0.4 per cent), carbohydrate (33.8 per
cent), ﬁbre (3.7 per cent), and the minerals calcium (1.7 per cent) and phosphorus (1.7
per cent).
                                                                        Draksha 105

19 Draksha




    Vitis vinifera L.
    Family: Vitaceae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is a climber with broad leaves, now cultivated in most of the temperate parts of the
world. There are many varieties of grapes, but in Ayurveda dry, big, black grapes with
seed are mainly used.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

Black grape is considered a nutritive, energizer, anti-inﬂammatory, diuretic, laxative
and bronchiodilater. It is an important ingredient of most fermented Ayurvedic pre-
parations (asav and arishta).

Medicated wine from grapes

Method Take 1kg black grapes (dry), 1kg sugar, 1kg honey, 125 g Woodfordia fruticosa
and 10 g each of Cinnamomum spp. leaves, cardamom seed, Mesua ferrea, clove, nutmeg,
black pepper, long pepper, Plumbago zeylanica, Piper cubeba, Piper longum root, Piper
chaba and Vitex negundo. Wash grapes and boil them in 5 litres of water until the water
is reduced to one-fourth, macerate the whole mass and ﬁlter through a coarse cloth to
obtain the juice. Dissolve sugar and honey in this juice. Make a coarse powder of all
the herbs and spices given above, mix them in this ﬂuid and store them in a suitable
container for fermentation for 45 days. The earlier method of fermentation was to use
earthen pitchers, covering the mouth of pitcher with an earthen lid, sealed with coarse
cloth followed by a layer of clay, but now for large-scale manufacturing wooden vats
are used.

Dose Two rice/teaspoons with half a cup of water twice daily.

Use It is a nutrient for digestive problems, indigestion, fatigue and ﬂatulence.
106 Draksha
Drakshavleh

Method Take 1kg dry black grapes, 200 g ghee, 2 kg sugar and 15 g each of nutmeg,
mace, cardamom, bamboo manna (silicic acid), Mesua ferrea and 3 g saffron. Macerate
the grapes after soaking them in water for one hour, heat them with ghee on a slow ﬁre.
Make a sugar syrup and add it to these heated grapes, followed by ﬁne powder of all
the herbs. Add water and allow the whole mixture to ferment for 45 days.

Dose 10–20 ml with milk twice daily.

Use   As a nutrient, in hyperacidity, constipation and cirrhosis of liver.

Draksharishta
The formulation of Draksharishta varies slightly as compared to Drakshasavleh and
both of these can be substituted for each other.
   Method: 1 kg dry black grapes, 4 kg raw sugar, 150 g Woodfordia ﬂowers, and 20 g
each of Embelia ribes, long pepper, cinnamon, cardamom seed, Cinnamomum spp. leaves,
ginger, Mesua ferrea and black pepper. Follow the process of Drakshasavleh.
   Use: As a laxative, for mental, physical fatigue and insomnia. It provides immediate
energy to the body. It is of use to women for excessive bleeding during menstruation,
leucorrhoea, etc.

THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES
Procyanidins from seed have an antimutagenic effect which counteracts spontaneous
mutation of Sacharomyces cerevisiac both at mitochondrial and nuclear level (Liviero
et al. 1994). Due to the antioxidant properties of procyanidins, it has potential use for
the chemoprevention of several pathological situations.
   On the combined basis of a large number of epidemological and clinical studies it
was concluded that wine phenolics can reduce heart diseases and mortality (Waterhouse,
1995). This nutritional and pharmacological signiﬁcance may be due to ﬂavonoids
(epicatechin, malvidin 3 glucosides, quercetin and procyanidins).

References
Liviero, L., Puglisi, P.P., Morazzoni, P., Bombardelli, E. (1994) Antimutagenic activity of
   procyanidins from Vitis vinifera. Fitoterapia, 65, 203–209.
Waterhouse, A.L. (1995) Wine and heart disease. Chemistry and Industry, No 9, 338–341.
                                                                           Gaduchi 107

20 Gaduchi




    Tinospora cordifolia (Willd.) Miers ex Hook.f. and Thomas
    T. malabarica (Lam.) Miers
    Family: Menispermaceae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is often substituted by other wild or cultivated species of Tinospora. It is a household
remedy, known as giloe, in most parts of India. Giloe climbing on Azadirachta indica
tree, known as neem, is considered superior and is called neem giloe. It is said that,
through its contact with the neem tree, it is able to absorb the therapeutic active
constituents from it.
   The plant (Fig. 11A) is a liana or a climber with a 1–3 cm thick stem and
rough, corky bark. Leaves are glabrous, cordate, 5–10 cm wide, acute or acuminate.
Male and female plants are separate. The ﬂowers are small, yellow green in colour.
The male ﬂowers are in fascicles, while females are solitary. The fruit is red when
ripe.
   The green stem or small dry pieces (Fig. 11B), about 2–5 cm long, are used as
medicine but the fresh stem is preferred. The dry pieces have an outer papery skin,
brownish wrinkled surface and numerous pores along the sides. It has a bitter, muci-
laginous taste.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

In Ayurveda it is called Amrita (nectar). The herb is considered bitter, hot in effect,
nutritive and a rasayana. The major uses of this herb are:

As a Rasayana
a The juice is given with honey or raw sugar.
b Boil 10 g of paste of gaduchi with 10 g Hemidesmus indicus in 100 ml of water, in a
covered pan for two hours on a low heat. Macerate the herbs in hot water and ﬁlter.
The dose is 5–10 ml, three times a day. This decoction is a good diuretic and Rasayana.
It is administered for leprosy, in the second stage of syphilis and to convalescent
patients after chronic diseases to combat the disease.
108 Gaduchi




    Figure 11 Tinospora cordifolia A twig, B stem pieces.


For urinogenital diseases
In sexually transmitted diseases, and in diabetes, etc., the herb’s juice or powder is
prescribed.

For malfunctioning of liver
The decoction of the herb with long pepper and honey is prescribed for lack of
appetite due to malfunctioning of liver, and in high fevers. In cirrhosis, jaundice,
                                                                            Gaduchi 109
indigestion, vomiting, mild stomach-ache, about 10 ml juice of the herb is given with
honey.

For skin diseases
In both chronic and obstinate types, it is given along with Commiphora, Azadirachta,
Emblica, turmeric and Acacia nilotica.

For menstruation problems
In South India, stem pieces are boiled in 2 cups of water and drunk during irregular
and excessive menstruation.

T. crispa
In Indonesia, it is used for malaria, small pox, as a vermifuge, an appetizer, for cholera
and for diabetes mellitus (Cavin et al. 1998).

Ayurvedic preparations

Amritadi kwath

Method Make a coarse powder of equal quantities of Cyperus rotundus, Tinospora,
Adhatoda vasica, Acacia catechu bark, Azadirachta leaves, turmeric, and Berberis bark.

Dose Boil 20 g of the above powder in 200 ml of water until reduced to 50 ml. Filter
and drink 50 ml or so of this decoction, as per capacity on an empty stomach in the
morning.

Uses For all digestive and liver problems as a blood puriﬁer, an antidote to poisons in
chicken pox, small pox, for small ulcers in the mouth, fevers, skin diseases and against
all intestinal worms.

Amritarisht

Method Boil the coarse powder of 1 kg Tinospora and 1 kg Dashmul (see amalaki) until
reduced to one-fourth, macerate the herb and ﬁlter. When cool, add 3 kg raw sugar to
the decoction in a pot, along with 160 g cumin, 20 g Fumaria indica herb, ﬁne
powders of 10 g each of Alstonia scholaris bark, ginger, black pepper, long pepper,
Cyperus rotundus, Mesua ferrea, Picrorhiza kurroa, Aconitum heterophyllum and Holarrhena
antidysterica seed. Seal the mouth of the pot with clay to make it air tight and let it
ferment for 30 days. Filter the fermented liquor and pour into bottles.

Dose 2 dessertspoonfuls for adults and 2 teaspoonfuls for children, in 200 ml of water
(one cup) after the meal, twice daily for a month.

Use It is said to be cooling in effect. It helps indigestion, acidity, stomach problems,
chronic fevers, fever after childbirth, colds, skin diseases, infectious hepatitis, polyurea
110 Gaduchi
due to diabetes and arthritic pains. It is useful for convalescing patients who are weak
due to fevers. It protects the liver from jaundice and other diseases.

Pit shamak Rasayana churn

Method Pulverize equal quantities of powders of Tinospora, Pedalium murex, Emblica
ofﬁcinalis and sugar.

Dose One teaspoonful with ghee on an empty stomach in the morning and two hours
after meals before retiring.

Use It helps ﬂatulence, hyperacidity, urinogenital diseases, polyurea, diabetes and
sexual inadequacies. It is particularly useful as an antidote to toxins present in the
body after the cure of sexually transmitted diseases.

Gaduchi satva

Method It is a starch obtained from the plant by chopping and crushing twigs about
2 cm thick and immersing them in water. The crushed pieces are macerated by hand
to separate the starch from the ﬁbres. The starch settles down after some time. The
water is decanted and the starch dried.
   This starch is said to be highly nutritive and is given to patients of chronic diar-
rhoea and dysentery, in seminal weakness and as a rejuvenator in general debility. Two
grams of this starch with milk is given for burning urethras, following the passing of
urine, and for urinary obstruction (enlarged prostate).


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Anti-microbial property
The alkaloid berberine has anti-bacterial, anti-fungal, anti-viral and anti-protozoal
properties.

Anti-ulcerogenic effect
Three indigenous preparations containing gaduchi had anti-ulcerogenic effect (Biswas
et al. 1993). Sarma et al. (1995b) conﬁrmed this activity.

As an anti-inﬂammatory agent
Shah and Pandya (1976) observed anti-inﬂammatory effects in the aqueous extract.
Mhaiskar et al. (1976), after clinical evaluation, noted that about half the patients of
arthritis and body pain received relief from this herb. Pendse et al. (1977) found anti-
inﬂammatory and immunosuppressive effects in the water extract of neem giloe. Oral or
intraperitoneal administration of water extract of the herb signiﬁcantly inhibited acute
                                                                          Gaduchi 111
inﬂammatory response. It also had an analgesic effect. It potentiated morphine but had
no antipyretic effect. When Kishore et al. (1980) tried ginger with gaduchi in rheuma-
tism and arthritis, the results were comparable with the other Ayurvedic preparations.
Gulati et al. (1980) used this herb in rheumatoid arthritis. Gulati and Pandey (1982)
conﬁrmed its anti-inﬂammatory activity. Ansari and Gaur (1983) observed that gaduchi
directly affects the metabolic activity of body and regulates heart beat. It helps in
chronic and acute inﬂammation and rheumatism. When 22 sufferers of rheumatoid
arthritis were treated with water extract of the herb, there was a signiﬁcant improvement.
   Amrutadiguggulu containing Tinospora with Commiphora gave good results in rheumatic
patients (Deshmukh and Ranade 1995).

As a hepatoprotective agent
The herb prevented ﬁbrous changes and regeneration of parenchymal tissue in albino
rats (Rege et al. 1984). It caused modulation of immunosuppression in obstructive
jaundice. The water extract 100 mg/kg for seven days improved cellular immune
functions and the mortality rate of the rats was signiﬁcantly reduced to 16.67 per cent
(Rege et al. 1989). Peer et al. (1990) found this herb was quite effective in proper liver
function in goats. T. cordifolia decoction showed improvement and regeneration of
hepatic cells. Reddy et al. (1993) conﬁrmed this activity.

Anticancerous activity
The effect of T. cordifolia on the functions of macrophages obtained from mice treated
with the carcinogen ochratoxin A was investigated by Dhuley (1997). It decreased the
chemotactic activity of murine macrophages and the production of interlukin and
tumour necrosis factor.

Hypoglycaemic effect
Wadood et al. (1992) observed this activity in leaf extract. Prasad et al. (1992) studied
hypoglycaemic and anti-hyperglycaemic effects of the extract. It showed synergistic
effect with insulin, tolbutamide and propranol. A signiﬁcant fall in glycaemic levels in
rats with glucose-induced hyper-glycaemia occurred. It showed anti-hyperglycaemic
effect in moderate alloxan diabetic rats but it was not effective in severe cases.
   Noor and Ashroft (1989) and Cavin et al. (1998) noted that T. crispa aqueous extract
exhibited hypoglycaemic activity in moderately diabetic rats. After two weeks of the
treatment there was an improvement in glucose tolerance and an increase in plasma
insulin levels, which showed improvement in diabetic conditions by virtue of its
action on endocrine pancreas.
   A polyherbal patent preparation containing gaduchi was also found effective in
pancreatic islet superoxide dismutase activity in hyperglycaemic rats (Bhattacharya
et al. 1997).

Immunomodulater activity
Dhanukar et al. (1988) studied the effect of this herb on the immunotherapeutic
modiﬁcation of abdominal sepsis induced by caecal ligation. The protective effect of
112 Gaduchi
pre-treatment with T. cordifolia against mixed abdominal infection was also studied.
This pre-treatment reduced the mortality rate, which was comparable to metrinidazole
and gentamycin. It also caused localization of infection. There was an increase in the
peripheral neutrophil count and peritoneal macrophages, which was associated with
increased phagocytic activity of macrophages. Pendse et al. (1977) and Rege et al.
(1989) recorded immunosuppression activity. Deshmukh and Usha (1994) noted the
potent immunostimulant activity in it. Tinospora stimulated percentage phagocytosis
in neutrophils in a dose dependent fashion. Usha et al. (1994) postulated that
immunomodulating potential produced leucocytosis in treated animals and protected
them against experimental models of infection. The herb produced a dose dependent
increase in bone marrow proliferation. Pokharankar and Nagarkatti (1994) observed
modulation of alveolar macrophage function in tuberculosis. Koti et al. (1994) studied
it in immunotherapy of multiple organ dysfunction in obstructive jaundice to bolster
the defence and to decrease the incidence of septicaemia. It resulted in increased survival
of patients. In experimental rats T. cordifolia 100 mg/kg/day for 5 weeks decreased
renal damage, improved the ﬁbrinogen level and reduced lead acetate-induced endo-
toxaemia. It decreased renal ischaemia-induced mortality. The herb increased the number
and function of neutrophils and monocyte macrophages. Dhawale (1994) studied the
immunostimulant effect of the herb on T-lymphocytes by carrying out a thymocyte
count. It was observed that pre- and post-treatment with Tinospora attenuated the
lymphopenic effect of steroids and hastened the regeneration of thymocytes. Maurya
et al. (1996) conﬁrmed immunostimulant action of the herb.

As an anti-stress agent
The herb helped in stress-induced gastric damage (Tillu et al. 1994). Sipahimalani
et al. (1994) isolated the adaptogen compounds to combat stress. Sarma et al. (1995a,
1996) studied the effect of 100 mg/kg of ethanol extract of Tinospora orally for 16 days
on brain neurotransmitters in stressed rats.
   A polyherbal preparation from Rauvolﬁa serpentina, Nardostachys jatamansi and Tinospora
cordifolia was evaluated by Rani and Naidu (1998), for clinical efﬁcacy and safety on
the patients of insomnia by subjective and polysomnographic methods. The results
were encouraging.

As an anti-allergic agent
The aqueous extract of the herb had this effect. It signiﬁcantly decreased bronchiospasms,
capillary permeability and reduced the number of disrupted mast cells in a number of
animals (Nayampalli et al. 1988).

Antioxidant effects
Three compounds isolated from T. crispa exhibited antioxidant and radical scavenging
properties (Cavin et al. 1998).

Anti-endotoxic property
Jayle et al. (1994) carried out these studies.
                                                                                  Gaduchi 113
Diuretic effect
Oke et al. (1977) observed that it produced marked diuretic effect in rats and dogs and
altered sodium, potassium and chlorine levels in urine.

Reviews
Sharma and Khosa (1993) reviewed chemistry and pharmacology and Pathak et al.
(1995) reviewed a chemistry and biological activity. Siddiqui and Zafar (1995)
reviewed phytochemical, pharmacological analysis and the formulations containing
Tinospora.

Chemical studies
The plant contains quarternary alkaloids, such as protoberberine bases, palmatine,
berberine, jattorrhizine and choline, phenylpropene, etc. (Bisset and Nwaiwu, 1983).

References
Ansari, M.S., Gaur, S.K. (1983) On the medicinal utility of Giloy. Nagarjun, 26, 12.
Bhattacharya, S.K., Satyan, K.S., Chakraborti, A. (1997) Effect of Trasina, an ayurvedic herbal
   formulation, on pancreatic islet superoxide dismutase activity in hyperglycaemic rats. Indian
   Journal of Experimental Biology, 35, 297–299.
Bisset, N.G., Nwaiwu, J. (1983) Quarternary alkaloids of Tinospora spp. Planta Medica, 48, 275.
Biswas, T.K., Chattopadhyaya, R.N., Dutta, S., Marjit, B., Maity, L.N. (1993) A preliminary
   study on antiulcerogenic effect of three indigenous drugs. Indian Journal of Physiology and
   Allied Sciences, 47, 170–175.
Cavin, A., Hostettmann, K., Dyatmyko, W., Potterat, O. (1998) Antioxidant and lipophilic
   constituents of Tinospora crispa. Planta Medica, 64, 393–396.
Deshmukh, A., Usha, D. In vitro effect of Tinospora cordifolia on PMN function. Update Ayurveda
   94, Bombay, 24–26 February, 1994.
Deshmukh, R., Ranade, S.B. (1995) Sandhishoola-sandhishotha and Amrutadi guggulu, in
   Kulkarni, P.H., ed., Advanced Research Papers.
Dhamnskar, R.K., Tanksale, K.G., Ainapurne, S.S. Hypoglycaemic effect of Tinospora cordifolia
   with special reference to enzymes in glycolytic pathway. Proceedings of 46th Annual Indian
   Pharmaceutical Congress, Chandigarh, India. 28–30 December, 1994.
Dhanukar, S.A., Thatte, U.M., Pai, N., Move, B.B., Karandikar, S.M. (1988) Immunotherapeutic
   modiﬁcation by Tinospora cordifolia of abdominal sepsis induced by caecal ligation in rats.
   Indian Journal of Gastroentrology, 7, 21–23.
Dhawale, D.P. Effect of Tinospora cordifolia on thymocyte counts in normal and lymphopenic
   mice. Update Ayurveda-94, Bombay India. 24–26 February, 1994.
Dhuley, J.N. (1997) Effect of some Indian herbs on macrophage functions in ochratoxin A
   treated mice. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 58, 15–20.
Gulati, O.D., Pandey, D.C. (1982) Antiinﬂammatory activity of Tinospora cordifolia. Rheumatism,
   17, 76–83.
Gulati, O.D., Shah, C.P., Kanani, R.C., Vaidya D.C., Shah, D.S. (1980) Clinical trial of
   Tinospora cordifolia in rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatism, 15, 143–148.
Javle, H.S., Koti, R.S., Bapat, R.D. Antiendotoxic effect of Tinospora cordifolia. Update Ayurveda-
   94, Bombay, India. 24–26 February, 1994.
Kishore, P., Pandey, P.N., Ruhil (1980) Role of Sunthi-Gaduci in the treatment of amvata-
   rheumatoid arthritis. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1, 417– 420.
114 Gaduchi
Koti, R.S., Rege, N.N., Javle, H.S., Desai, N.K., Bapat, R.D., Dahnukar, S.A Tinospora
   cordifolia: A boon in therapy of multiorgan dysfunction in obstructive jaundice. Update
   Ayurveda 94, Bombay, India, 24–26 February, 1994.
Mhaiskar, V.B., Pandey, D.C., Karmakar, K.B. (1976) Clinical evaluation of Tinospora cordifolia
   in amvata and sandhigatvata. Rheumatism, 11, 77–81.
Maurya, R., Wazir, V., Kapil, A., Kapil, S. (1996) Cordifoliosides A and B, two new
   phenylpropene disaccharides from Tinospora cordifolia possessing immunostimulant activity.
   Natural Product Letters, 8, 7–10.
Nayampalli, S.S., Desai, N.K., Ainapure, S.S. (1988) Antiallergic properties of Tinospora cordifolia
   in animal models. Indian Journal of Pharmacology, 18, 250–252.
Noor, N., Ashroft, S.J.H. (1989) Antidiabetic effects of Tinospora crispa in rats. Journal of
   Ethnopharmacology, 27, 149–161.
Oke, V.G., Ainapure, S.S., Molgiri, S.R., Shah, N.D., Dhar, H. L. Diuretic action of Tinospora
   cordifolia (Abstract). 9th Annual Conference of Indian Pharmacological Society, Varanasi, Dec.
   29–31, 1976. Indian Journal of Pharmacology, 9, 77. Abstr.92.
Pathak, A.K., Jain, D.C., Sharma, R.P. (1995) Chemistry and biological activities of the
   genera Tinospora. International Journal of Pharmacognosy, 33, 277–287.
Peer, F., Sharma, M.C., Prasad, M.C. (1990) Efﬁcacy of Liv.52 and Tinospora cordfolia in
   experimental C Cl4 hepatopathy in goats. Indian Journal of Animal Sciences, 60, 526–531.
Pendse, V.K., Dadhich, A.P., Mathur, P.N., Bal, B.M.S., Madan, B.R. (1977) Antiinﬂammatory,
   immunosuppresive and some related pharmacological actions of the water extract of neem
   giloe (Tinospora cordifolia) a preliminary report. Indian Journal of Pharmacology, 9, 221–224.
Pokharankar, S.L., Nagarkatti, D.S. Modulation of alveolar macrophage function by antituber-
   culous agents and Tinospora cordifolia. Update Ayurveda-94, Bombay, India, 24–26 Feb. 1994.
Prasad, H.C., Majumdar, R., Chakraborty, R. Hypoglycaemic and antihyperglycaemic effect
   of medicinal plants from Assam. International Seminar-Traditional Medicine, Calcutta, 7–9
   November 1992.
Rani, P.U., Naidu, M.U.R. (1998) Subjective and polysomnographic evaluation of a herbal
   preparation in insomnia. Phytomedicine, 5, 253–257.
Reddy, B.P., Murthy, V.N., Venkateshwarlu, V., Kokate, C.K., Rambhau, D. (1993)
   Antiheptotoxic activity of Phyllanthus niruri, Tinospora cordifolia and Ricinus communis. Indian
   Drugs, 30, 338–341.
Rege, N., Dhanukar, S., Karndikar, S.M. (1984) Hepatoprotective effects of Tinospora cordifolia
   against carbon tetrachloride-induced liver damage. Indian Drugs, 21, 544–555.
Rege, N., Nazareth, H.M., Bapat, R.D., Dhanukar, S.A. (1989) Modulation of immuno-
   suppression in obstructive jaundice by Tinospora cordifolia. Indian Journal of Medical Research,
   90, 478– 483.
Sarma, D.N.K., Khosa, R.L., Chansuria, J.P.N., Ray, A.K. (1995a) Effect of Tinospora cordifolia
   on brain neurotransmitters in stressed rats. Fitoterapia, 66, 421– 422.
Sarma, D.N.K., Khosa, R.L., Chansuria, J.P.N., Sahai, M. (1995b) Anti-ulcer activity of Tinopsora
   cordifolia Miers and Centella asiatica Linn. extracts. Phytotherapy Research, 9, 589–590.
Sarma, D.N.K., Khosa, R.L., Chansuria, J.P.N., Sahai, M. (1996) Antistress activity of Tinospora
   cordifolia and Centella asiatica extracts. Phytotherapy Research, 10, 181–183.
Shah, D.S., Pandya, D.C. (1976) A preliminary study about the anti-inﬂammatory activity of
   Tinospora cordifolia. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, Yoga and Homoeopathy, 11, 77–83.
Sharma, D.N.K., Khosa, R.L. (1993) Chemistry and pharmacology of Tinospora cordifolia Miers.
   Indian Drugs, 30, 549–554.
Siddiqui, A.A., Zafar, R. (1995) Tinospora cordifolia Miers. A review. Hamdard Medicus, 38,
   85–90.
Sipahimalani, A., Norr, H., Wagner, H. (1994) Phenylpropanoid glycosides and tetrahydro-
   furofuran lignan glycosides from the adaptogenic plant drugs, Tinospora cordifolia and Drypetes
   roxburghii. Planta Medica, 60, 596–597.
                                                                            Gaduchi 115
Tillu, C.V. Comparative effects of plant products on stress-induced damage. Update Ayurveda-
  94, Bombay, India, 24–26 February, 1994.
Usha, D., Thatte, U.M., Joshi, D.S. Flow cytometry evaluation of bone marrow proliferation
  induced by Tinospora cordifolia. Update Ayurveda-94, Bombay, India, 24–26 February, 1994.
Wadood, N., Wadood, A., Shah, S.A.W. (1992) Effect of Tinopsora cordifolia on blood glucose
  and total lipid levels of normal and alloxan-diabetic rabbits. Planta Medica, 58, 131–136.
116 Gokshru

21 Gokshru




    Tribulus terrestris L.
    Family: Zygophyllaceae

The herb is known as gokshru (go is cow and kshru hoof ) in Sanskrit because of the
shape of each of the fruit’s cocci, which resemble the hoof of a cow. The corrupted
form of this name in Indian languages is gokhru. In the western countries it is com-
monly known as Puncture Vine or Caltrop fruit.


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is a prostate spiny, hairy herb (Fig. 12A) with yellow ﬂowers. Leaves are 2–4 cm
long, paripinnate, with 6–10 oblong leaﬂets. The fruit is hemi-spherical, breaking
into ﬁve cocci, with two types of spine: bigger and smaller. Sometimes the smaller
spines are quite inconspicuous. Each cocci has ﬁve seeds (Fig. 12B). The seed is quite
hard and woody but can be powdered easily. The powder is starchy and has a pleasant
smell.
   Tribulus terrestris is often called small gokhru and Pedalium murex (Fig. 12C) is known
as big gokhru because its seeds are bigger (Fig. 12D). Whereas T. terrestris grows on dry
and arid land, P. murex is found growing in dry and hot coastal areas.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

The fruit is mainly used as a single entity in various recipes, whereas the root is an
ingredient of a preparation called Dashmul (see amalaki). In Ayurveda, the fruit is
considered to be cooling in effect, having diuretic, tonic and aphrodisiac properties.
It is mainly used in the form of an infusion for painful micturition, calculus affections,
urethral discharges, impotence, gout, kidney diseases and kidney stones. Plant and
dry spiny fruits are also used for spermatorrhea, phosphaturia, urinary incontinence,
Bright’s disease, nephritis and inﬂammation of the kidney. It has a diuretic effect
similar to buchu and uva-ursi. It is mainly used for diseases of the urinogenital system
as follows:

1   In impotence, the plant is boiled until mucilaginous and mixed with Hyoscyamus
    and opium.
                                                                                   Gokshru   117




Figure 12 Tribulus terrestris: A twig, B fruit, Pedalium murex: C twig, D fruit.




2   Equal parts of Tribulus seed, sesame seed and goat milk cures impotence.
3   Take 2.5 kg of T. terrestris herb and boil it in 64 litres of water until reduced to
    one-fourth, strain, add 6 kg of sugar to it and boil again until a thick syrup is
    formed. To this syrup add the ﬁne powder of ginger, long pepper, black pepper,
    cardamom, Mesua ferrea, Cinnamomum spp. leaves, nutmeg, Terminalia arjuna, and
    bamboo manna.

    Dose 25 g twice daily.

    Use Stimulant tonic, for sexual debility and impotence.

4   Pulverize equal quantities of clove, cardamom and Tribulus.

    Dose 10 g twice daily with milk and ghee.

    Use An elixir preparation for strength and long life.
118 Gokshru
5     Make an infusion of the whole plant by taking one part of the herb in 8 parts of
      water.

      Dose 100 ml thrice daily.

      Use It relieves burning of the urethra whilst passing urine, cures nocturnal
      emission and impotence.

6     Take 40 g each of Chlorophytum arundinaceum root, Tribulus fruit, henna leaves,
      gum tragacanth, Butea frondosa gum, Cydonia vulgaris seed, soapstone and
      60 g sugar candy. Make a ﬁne powder of all these items and divide it into 40
      doses.

      Dose Take two Strychnos potatorum seeds and grind them on stone with water
      until a ﬁne paste is formed. Shake this paste in a glass of water and take it with
      one dose of powder prepared above, twice daily.

      Use It not only clears leucorrhoea but helps physiological weakness, body aches,
      etc. For better results use 10 g fried gum acacia along with milk sweetened with
      sugar.

7     The whole herb of Tribulus is collected at the pre-fruiting stage, dried in the
      shade, powdered and macerated for one day in fresh juice of Tribulus, dried again
      and powdered.

      Dose 12 g with milk. Take rice as a staple diet.

      Use It makes the body strong, good looking, sexually active and imparts longevity.

In Chinese Medicine
It is considered a diuretic, aphrodisiac and a cardiotonic. It is included amongst
the herbs used for curing liver wind and stopping tremors. It is used for eye, liver
and cardiac diseases ( Jian Xin Li, 1998), as an immunobuilder for restoration of
normal body functions and for promoting blood circulation to remove blood stasis
(Fang, 1999).

Ayurvedic preparations

Gokshuradi churn I

Ingredients Pulverize 110 g T. terrestris and 40 g each of Piper cubeba, Mesua ferrea,
Rheum palmatum and potassium nitrate.

Dose 10–20 g.

Use    For various urinary diseases.
                                                                              Gokshru    119
Gokshuradi churn II

Ingredients Pulverize 60 g each of T. terrestris, Astercantha longifolia, Asparagus racemosus,
Mucuna pruriens, Sida cordifolia, and Abutilon indicum.

Dose 2–3 g with warm, sweet milk, one hour before retiring.

Use As a nutritive tonic for increasing libido, and for curing premature ejaculation.

Gokshuradi churn III

Ingredients Pulverize equal quantities of Sida rhombifolia, S. spinosa, Mucuna pruriens
dry boiled seed, Asparagus racemosus, Astercantha longifolia and Tribulus terrestris.

Dose One teaspoon two to three times a day with milk.

Use It increases mental, physical and sexual power, particularly in the cases of
premature ejaculation and spermatorrhoea, if used for 3–4 months. It is a good
aphrodisiac if used one hour before intercourse.

Contraindication Avoid acidic (sour) food substances.

Dhatu paushtik churn

Ingredients   3 g each of ﬁnely powdered T. terrestris and gum tragacanth.

Dose Heat the above powder in two teaspoonfuls of clariﬁed butter ( ghee), use it
along with warm milk ﬁrst thing in the morning and have a meal after three hours.
Similarly in the evening take this powder two hours after dinner as the last item
consumed, so nothing should be eaten afterwards. Continue this treatment for min-
imum of two months.

Use For proper function of the sexual system.

Contraindications Avoid fried, spicy and sour food.

Narsimha churn

Ingredients Equal parts of powdered Emblica ofﬁcinalis, Terminalia chebula, T. bellirica,
ginger, long pepper, black pepper, sesame seed and Semecarpus anacardium.

Dose 1– 4 g powder with milk and ghee.

Indications   For sexual inadequacy.
120 Gokshru
THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

As an anabolic agent
Some of the studies have indicated that Tribulus caused a 50 per cent increase in
testosterone levels and improved reproductive function. The active constituents of the
fruit had a stimulating effect on immune, sexual and reproductive systems, with
improved muscle building, stamina and endurance. It also caused a reduction in
cholesterol. It altered moods and imparted a feeling of well-being. Tribulus as a liver
tonic breaks down the cholesterol and fats that inhibit healthy liver function. The
cholesterol and fats are converted to hormones and energy, resulting in increased
performance and stamina, which is very beneﬁcial to body builders. It also causes a
positive nitrogen balance and early recovery from muscular stress.

Diuretic activity
Earlier, diuretic activity of the herb was considered to be due to the nitrates present in
it, but it may also be due to alkaloids (Santha and Iyer (1967). Deepak Prakash et al.
(1985) and Singh et al. (1991) conﬁrmed the diuretic activity of the herb. Tribulus
alkaloid (harmine) increased blood pressure and renal perfusion.
   Varunadi kwath, a decoction made from Crataeva religiosa, Tribulus, ginger, Bergenia
ligulata, Woodfordia fruticosa and raw sugar, was given to patients with urinary
complaints. Excellent results were obtained in 64 per cent cases (Suru and Kulkarni,
1991).

Nephroprotective potential
Simultaneous administration of 200 mg/kg/day of Tribulus extract and gentamycin
to female rats decreased gentamycin-induced renal damage in both structural and
functional terms. The effect was comparable to verpamil (Nagarkatti et al. 1994).

Antiurolithic effect
Various extracts of the herb showed signiﬁcant dose-dependent protection against
urolith, induced by glass bead implantation in albino rats. It also protected leucocytosis
and elevation in serum urea levels. The anti-urolithic activity appeared to be due to
the combined effects of several constituents present in the extracts (Anand et al. 1994).
The therapeutic response of aqueous extract on hyperoxaluria in male adult rats was
studied by Sangeeta et al. (1993). After 24 hours urinary oxalate excretion reversed to
normal. These authors (Sangeeta et al. 1994) studied oxalate metabolism further and
postulated that normalization of kidney LDH (lactate dehydrogenase) feeding was
mainly due to increases in the LDH5 fraction as the LDH1 remained unchanged in
the groups. It decreased the activities of glycolate oxidase and glycolate dehydrogenase
in liver, but the activity of hepatic lactate dehydrogenase was unaltered. The ethanol
extract was tested for experimentally induced urolithiasis in albino rats. It exhibited
dose-dependent anti-urolithiatic activity and almost completely inhibited stone for-
mation. Other biochemical parameters in urine and blood serum and the histopathology
                                                                           Gokshru   121
of the urinary bladder, which were altered during the process of stone formation, were
also normalized by the plant extract (Anand et al. 1994).

As a sexual stimulant
A new preparation Tribestan had a stimulative effect on the sexual system. The active
components are steroidal saponins of furostanoic type (Tomova, 1987). Oral adminis-
tration of saponin terrestrioside F in male rats increased libido and sexual response. In
females the compound potentiated oestrus and increased fertility (Anon., 1992).

Effect on cardiovascular system
The aqueous extract had a potent stimulant effect on heart muscles in a hypodynamic
state (Seth and Jagadeesh, 1976). The aqueous extract, the ethanol water extract 30
per cent, and ethanol extract of the fruit produced hypotensive effect in anaesthetized
animals (Anon., 1977). The total steroidal sapogenins have shown antisclerotic proper-
ties (Schreter, 1980). The alkaloid produced a slight rise in blood pressure and an
increase in kidney secretions. When coronary heart disease patients were treated with
saponins, the total efﬁcacious rate of remission in angina pectoris was 82.3 per cent.
The saponins dilated coronary arteries, improved coronary circulation and had the
effect of improving ECG of myocardial ischaemia. It had no adverse effect on renal,
blood or hepatic systems and thus is a drug of choice to treat angina pectoris (Bowen
et al. 1990).

Effect on central nervous system
The activity of alkaloid is α-adrenergic, β-adrenergic and papaverine-like (Noogi et al.
1977). When 20 mg/kg of the drug was administered to rats, there was a sign of CNS
excitation, characterised by increase in spontaneous motility, excitability and restless-
ness (Deepak Prakash et al. 1985).

As a hepatoprotective agent
Tribulus provided hepatoprotection to primary cultured hepatocytes (Lee et al. 1992).
The compounds isolated from the herb signiﬁcantly prevented cell death induced by
α-galactosamine, tumour necrosis factor ( Jian Xin Li, 1998).

Antibacterial activity
The extract of the herb inhibited the growth of Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli
(Anon., 1977).

Chemical studies
Quite a number of steroidal sapogenins have been reported. The important ones are
diosgenin, hicogenin, ruscogenin, yamogenin, epismilagenin, tigogenin, neotigogenin,
gitogenin and neogitogenin (Mahato et al. 1978, Miles et al. 1994). Five new steroidal
saponins (terrestrosins A-E) were isolated by Wang Yan et al. (1996).
122 Gokshru
Toxicological studies
Due to grazing on the herb Tribulus, a disease called geeldikkop, which causes photo-
sensitivity, has been reported in sheep (Miles et al. 1994). No such toxicity has been
reported from the various experiments carried out in India.

Substitutes

Pedalium murex L.
It is known as big gokhru in commerce and is used in place of T. terrestris.
   An infusion of the fresh herb, 1 part in 20 parts of water, dose 500 ml, is given
daily in cases of spermatorrhoea and nocturnal emission. A decoction of dry fruit is
used when the fresh plant is not available. Fresh leaves and young shoots, kept for a
few minutes in boiling milk, give it a bitter taste and renders it mucilaginous. The
milk so obtained is used as an aphrodisiac and is advised in sexual debility.

Tribulus alatus Del.
The fruit of this herb, which is pear-shaped winged, with two seeds, is known as
Gokhru Kalan.

References
Anand, R., Patnaik, G.K., Srivastava, S., Kulshreshtha, D.K., Dhawan, B.N. (1994) Evalua-
   tion of antiurolithiatic activity of Tribulus terrestris. International Journal of Pharmacognosy 32,
   217–224.
Anon. Encyclopaedia of Chinese Medicinal Substances. Shanghai People’s Publishers, Shanghai,
   China 1977.
Anon. Selected Medicinal Plants. Chemxcil, Bombay, India 1992.
Bowen, W., Long’en, M. Tongku (1990) Clinical observation on 406 cases of angina pectoris of
   coronary heart disease treated with saponin of Tribulus terrestris. Chinese Journal of Traditional
   and Western Medicine, 10, 85–87.
Fang, S., Hao, C., Liu, Z., Song, F, Liu S. (1999) Application of electrospray ionisation, mass
   spectrometry techniques for the proﬁling of steroidal saponin mixture extract from Tribulus
   terrestris. Planta Medica, 65, 68–73.
Jian, Xin Li, Shi, Q., Xiong, G., Prasain, J.K., Tezuka, Y., Hareyama, T., Wang, Zlex, tanaka,
   K., Namba, T., Kadota, S. (1998) Tribulusamide A & B, new hepatoprotective lignamides
   from the fruits of Tribulus terrestris: Indication of cytoprotective activity in murine hepatocyte
   culture. Planta Medica, 64, 628–631.
Lee, J.W., Choi, J.H., Kang, S.M. (1992) Screening of medicinal plants having hepatoprotective
   activity. Effect with primary cultured hepatocytes intoxicated using carbon tetrachloride
   cytotoxicity. Korean Journal of Pharmacognosy, 23, 268–275.
Mahato, S.B., Sahu, N.P., Pal, B.C., Chakravarti, R.N., Chakravarti, D., Ghosh, A. (1978) Screen-
   ing of Tribulus terrestris plants for diosgenin. Journal Institute of Chemistry (India), 50, 49–50.
Miles, C.O., Wilkins, A.L., Erasmus, G.L., Kellerman, T.S., Coetzer, J.A.W. (1994) Photosens-
   itivity in South Africa. VII. Chemical composition of biliary crystals from a sheep with
   experimentally induced geeldikkop. Onderstepoort Journal of Veterinay Research, 61, 215–222.
Nagarkatti, D.S., Rege, N.N., Mittal, B.V., Uchil, D.A., Desai, N.K., Dahanukar, S.A. Avenue
   ahead: Nephroprotection by Tribulus terrestris. Update Ayurveda-94, Bombay, India 1994.
                                                                                     Gokshru      123
Noogi, N.C., Chakraborty, B., Sikadar, S., Ray, N.M. (1977) Investigations on the pharmaco-
   logoical properties of Tribulus terrestris. Indian Medical Gazette, 17, 174–176.
Prakash, Deepak, Singh, P.N., Wahi, S.P. (1985) An evaluation of Tribulus terrestris L. (chota
   gokhru). Indian Drugs, 22, 332–333.
Sangeeta, D., Sidhu, H., Thind, S.K., Nath, R., Vaidyanathan, S. (1993) Therapeutic response
   of Tribulus terrestris (Gokhru) aqueous extract on hyperoxaluria in male adult rats. Phytotherapy
   Research, 7, 116–119.
Sangeeta, D., Sidhu, H., Thind, S.K., Nath, R. (1994) Effect of Tribulus terrestris on oxalate
   metabolism in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 41, 61–66.
Santha, G., Iyer, G.Y.N. (1967) Preliminary studies on the diuretic effects of Hygrophila spinosa
   and Tribulus terrestris. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 55, 714–716.
Schreter, I.A. (1980) Distribution of Tribulus terrestris L. in the Soviet Union. Rastitelnye Resursy,
   16, 513–523 (in Russian).
Seth, S.D., Jagdeesh, G. (1976) Cardiac action of Tribulus terrestris. Indian Journal of Medical
   Research, 64, 1821–1825.
Singh, R.G., Singh, R.P., Usha, Shukla, K.P., Singh, P. (1991) Experimental evaluation of
   diuretic action of herbal drug Tribulus terrestris on albino rats. Journal of Research and Education
   in Indian Medicine, 10, 19–21.
Suru, P.P, Kulkarni, P.H. (1991) Study of use of Varunadi Kwath in Mutrakruchchra. Deerghayu
   International, 7, 2–4.
Tomova, M. (1987) Tribestan (A preparation from Tribulus terrestris). Farmatsiya (in Russian),
   37, 40– 42.
Wang Yan, Ohtani, K., Kasai, R., Yamasaki, R. (1996) Steroidal saponins from fruits of
   Tribulus terrestris. Phytochemistry, 42, 1417–1422.
124 Guggal

22 Guggal




    Commiphora wightii (Arn.) Bhandari
    Syn. C. mukul (Hook. ex Stocks) Engl.,
    Balsamodendron roxburghii Stocks
    Family: Burseraceae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is a woody shrub (Fig. 13A) up to 2 m tall with knotty, crooked, spiny, brown
branches, growing in hot rocky areas of Indian deserts and adjoining areas in Pakistan.
Leaﬂets 1–3, rhomboid-ovate serrate. Flowers are brownish red in fasciles of 2–3.
There are 8–10 stamens which alternate between long and short, and are half the size
of the petals. There are 8–10 lobed discs and the ovary is oblong-ovoid. The fruit is a
red drupe, 6–8 mm in diameter.
   For medicinal purposes oleo-gum resin (Fig. 13B) is used. It is exuded from the
plant in winter or is collected by making cuts or by removing bark at some places.
It is a lustrous pale brown, semi-solid mass. Application of inorganic acids to the stem
increases the yield of gum but the plant dies after this treatment because of dehydration.
   The quality of the gum depends on its colour and on the amount of foreign organic
and inorganic matters present in it. The fresh good quality guggal is sticky, lustrous,
yellowish, sweet smelling (cedarwood-like), where as old guggal is dull in colour,
brownish black. The lump of gum, which has a greenish hue and superﬁcially resem-
bles the eye of a buffalo, is considered the best. The other grades of the gum are
brownish with some wood chips, while inferior gum is a mixture of dirt and rocks.
Earlier, the low-grade gum was used as ﬂoor plaster. The genuine gum can be differ-
entiated from its common substitute salai guggal by ﬂame test. Guggal near a ﬂame
bulges like a balloon and bursts, but salai guggal burns immediately. When macerated
in water, guggal forms greenish white emulsion.

Puriﬁcation of Guggal
As far as possible only fresh guggal should be used. For incorporation into herbal
formulations, it is puriﬁed and cleaned to remove foreign organic and inorganic mat-
ters like pieces of wood, bark, stone, sand and soil. Various methods are followed for
this purpose but usually the gum is put into a bag of thick coarse cloth and boiled in
an aqueous medium such as pure water, cow’s urine, decoction of Triphala or other
                                                                           Guggal 125




    Figure 13 Commiphora wightii A twig, B gum.



herbs. Boiling is continued until the guggal turns soft. On a separate table, a wooden
board is smeared with ghee and the molten gum is spread on the board with a spatula.
All impurities are picked out by hand and the gum is allowed to dry in the air. The
dried gum is fried in ghee and is powdered for medicinal purposes. In another method,
a decoction is prepared from equal quantities of coarse powders of Triphala and Tinospora,
with milk. The decoction is ﬁltered to remove water insoluble matter. Raw guggal
is put into a cloth bag and this bag is allowed to hang in this boiling decoction.
Occasionally the cloth bag is pressed with big wooden spatula to extract molten guggal
from the bag. When nearly all of the molten guggal has come out, the bag is discarded.
The mixture of decoction and extracted guggal is heated further, in the presence of
ghee, until dry. In south India (Shanavaskhan et al. 1997), crude gum is boiled in water
containing 3 parts of Azadirachta leaves and one part of freshly harvested untreated
turmeric (normally turmeric is boiled and dried before storage). The mixture is ﬁltered
through cheesecloth and the ﬁltrate heated further until no water is left. The resulting
gum residue is fried in ghee or castor oil and used. All these treatments cause the loss
of essential oil, which has a therapeutic activity, so a better method is to ﬁrst sort the
gum by hand and then macerate it in hot ghee.

USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA
Guggal has been mentioned in Atheraveda and in most of the other ancient Ayurvedic
works. It is considered dry, pungent, aromatic, a Rasayana, anti-tridosha, nutritive,
126 Guggal
lubricant for the body systems, stimulant and digestant. This gum is so important in
Ayurveda that it constitutes a separate group of preparations under the general name
guggal in materia medica. It is not possible to mention the details of all these so only
selected uses are given here.

For rheumatism
As per Ayurveda, gum guggal acts as an anti-inﬂammatory agent for all types of pains
in the body because of its hot effects, particularly rheumatism, called amavata in
Ayurveda. Ama is produced by improper digestion and metabolism and gets lodged
in the joints to produce inﬂammation and pains. Usually the patients with diet
irregularity and constipation are affected by amavata. To counteract it, a polyherbal
and polymineral preparation Mahayograja guggal is often prescribed for these purposes,
but it has been observed that Simhanda guggal is more useful for the patients suffering
from constipation. If it causes a burning sensation then the dose may be reduced. If
there is constipation, then a mild laxative like castor oil may be prescribed along with
the pills.

For liver problems
Because of its dry nature guggal helps in sluggish liver.

For malaria
It helps in fever, when accompanied by shivering.

As an aphrodisiac
This effect, is probablys due to its power to dissolve fat from the arteries, which
allow free ﬂow of blood to sexual parts, and thus helps impotence, and in vaginal
diseases.

For bronchial troubles
This effect is due to the gum’s pungency and hotness. In chronic cases of bronchitis
and in tuberculosis it dissolves sputum and clears the throat. Ten grams of a prepara-
tion made from equal quantities of long pepper, Adhatoda leaves, honey and ghee is
prescribed for these purposes.

For cardiac problems
It is used for heart diseases, blood pressure problems , anaemia and other diseases of
the blood, normally along with pushkarmul.

As a diuretic
Through its diuretic effect, it dissolves kidney stones.
                                                                            Guggal 127
For digestive problems
In indigestion, diarrhoea, dysentery, gastroenteritis, inﬂammation of the intestine, it
acts as an intestinal antiseptic. It may be mixed with an equal quantity of aloe extract
to make a dose of 5 g.

For sexually transmitted diseases
It reduces the inﬂammation of the urinogenital tract. In gonorrhoea, it is given with
Hemidesmus indicus, and in syphilis with Tinopsora.

For fractures
Pills made with equal quantities of this gum and shilajit (a bituminous herbo-mineral
compound) are prescribed during fractures. A plaster of the gum is applied externally.

In gynaecological practices
It has a beneﬁcial effect on the female reproductive system. In general practice,
pills made with gum guggal along with the extract of aloe and ferrous sulphate
are given. In sterility due to leucorrhoea, guggal with Berberis extract is a drug of
choice.

For skin diseases
In all types of skin diseases of unknown aetiology, a dose of 25–200 mg of gum guggal
has been found to impart lustre to the skin, giving it a healthy look. It has given good
results even in leprosy.

External applications
Because of anti-inﬂammatory, antiseptic and healing properties, external application
of gum is useful in arthritis, rheumatic pains and piles. A gargle of alcoholic extract of
the gum in water is effective for all mouth and throat problems, such as ulcers,
inﬂammation, tonsillitis, dental caries and pyorrhoea. A drop of the gum in the mouth
is also used as a lozenge.
   It is an anti-microbial and deodorant, so it is used as a fumigant in obstinate ulcers
and in chronic septic cases.

Contraindications
While using guggal preparations, avoid acidic foods, strong medicines, alcohol, heavy
exercises, sunbathing, anger and sexual intercourse.

Side effects
It may cause rashes in some cases.
128 Guggal
   If not used in a proper way, it has a deleterious effect on the liver and lungs. Its
use can cause excessive dryness of the body, impotence, giddiness and laziness. If any
of these conditions exist then this gum should not be used for these and other related
diseases.

Ayurvedic preparations

Mahayograja guggulu

Ingredients 1.12 g each of ginger, long pepper fruit and root, asafoetida, celery, cumin,
mustard, calamus, Piper chaba, Plumbago zeylanica, Wrightia tinctoria, Vitex agnus-castus,
Cissampelos pareira, Embelia ribes, Scindapsus ofﬁcinalis, Picrorhiza kurrooa, Aconitum hetero-
phyllum, Clerodendrum serratum, and Senseveria roxburghiana, 49.5 g Triphala, 65 g
guggul gum, and 17.5 g each of processed tin, silver, lead, iron, mica, and red oxide of
mercury.

Method Macerate and heat the gum, add all the ingredients in powder form so
the whole mass is homogenous. Moisten with water if necessary and make pills of
250 mg each.

Dose 250–500 mg.

Uses In various rheumatic and arthritic conditions, neuritis, lumbago, sciatica, obesity,
cardiac diseases, respiratory diseases such as asthma and in gastrointestinal disorders,
such as colitis, etc.
   Mahayograj Guggal or its simpler form, Yograja Guggal, are manufactured by a large
number of pharmacies. The ingredients and the quantities of the raw materials in
these products vary in each case so Arora et al. (1973) prepared a standardized Yograja
Guggal, as per classical Ayurvedic method, and tested it against arthritis produced by
various agents. This product was not signiﬁcantly effective. The various commercial
products sold in the market were much less active compared with the standardized
ones. Autarkar et al. (1984) studied side effects and tolerability of Yogaraj Guggal.

Medohar guggal

Ingredients Five grams of ﬁnely powdered ginger, long pepper, black pepper, Triphala,
Plumbago zeylanica, Cyperus scariousus, and Embelia ribes, 45 g gum guggal and 10 ml
castor oil.

Preparation Sprinkle castor oil on gum guggal and pound it. When soft add the
ﬁne powders of the above herbs and make pills of 250 mg from the homogenous
mass.

Dose 2– 4 pills twice daily with water. During this medication, eat light food regu-
larly and do not remain hungry. Drink a minimum amount of water with meals, but
as much as possible one to two hours after the meals. Drink water on an empty
stomach in the morning.
                                                                          Guggal 129
Uses In obesity use the above pills for 5–6 months.

Contraindications Avoid sweet and fatty foods. Do mild exercise regularly.

Guglip
(Patent preparation) CIPLA, Bombay.

Ingredient Each tablet contains 25 mg of guggalsterone.

Indications   In mixed hyperlipidaemia: total serum cholesterol > 220 mg/dl
                                        total serum triglyceride > 170 mg/dl
              In hypercholesterolaemia: total serum cholesterol > 220 mg/dl
              In hypertriglyceridaemia: total serum triglyceride > 190 mg/dl

Dosage 1 tablet three times a day after the meals.

Precautions Use under medical supervision in hepatic diseases, diarrhoea, dysentery,
etc.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

As a hypolipidaemic agent
Keeping in view the importance of guggal in Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia, after interpret-
ing the ancient texts, extensive studies were carried out in Benaras Hindu University,
Varanasi in India by Satyawati (1969, 1988) and others. It was seen that in Sushsrut
Sanhita, it has been given for aetiology, pathogenesis, treatment of obesity, associated
lipid disorders and the complications arising due to them. On the basis of this informa-
tion, gum guggal was screened for possible hypolipidaemic, obesity and hypercholest-
erolaemic effects. It was seen that it protected animals against cholesterol-induced
atheroscelerosis. It reduced the body weight. When patients of various illnesses were
administered 6–12 g of raw gum guggal in three divided doses for 15–30 days, there
was a fall in serum cholesterol. The oral administration of crude guggal, the alcohol
soluble and insoluble fractions brought about a fall in serum cholesterol and serum
turbidity (high serum turbidity is associated with hypercholesterolaemia) due to ster-
oids (Malhotra et al. 1970). The effect of crude guggal on serum lipids in obese bodies
was studied by Kuppurajan et al. (1973). When used for three months it brought
about a signiﬁcant decrease in mean serum cholesterol levels. A patented preparation
of guggal was found to be effective in obesity (Varadani, 1973). The petroleum ether
extract of guggal prevented hyperlipidaemia caused by oestrogen. It did not allow the
synthesis of fats in the body so body weight was reduced and amount of blood lipids
became less. Histological changes indicated enhance activities in the thyroid. On the
basis of this study Gupta et al. (1974) concluded that guggal was a good therapeutic
agent to prevent and treat hyperlipidaemia and adiposity associated with oestrogen
hyperactivity and with hypothyroidism. Tripathi et al. (1975) observed that the active
130 Guggal
principles of the gum showed regression of hyperlipidaemia. Guggal in general reduced
body weight in the obese objects. The feeding of oleoresin to cholesterol-fed rats
enhanced the faecal excretion of bile acids, with an increase in cholesterol excretion
(Sidhu et al. 1976). Gupta et al. (1978) assessed the hypocholesterolaemic and hypolipid-
aemic effects of the gum in patients suffering from lipid disorders. Singh et al. (1983)
studied the effect of ether extract on experimental hypothyroidism by melatonin.
It increased the weight and iodine uptake of the thyroid gland. Kotiyal et al. (1985)
tried a fraction of the gum for obesity. Agrawal et al. (1986) and Gopal et al. (1986)
carried out clinical trials of gugulipid (guggalsterone) isolated from gum guggal by
ethyl acetate, in primary hypolipidaemia. According to Satyawati (1988) this fraction
lowered serum lipids including cholesterol, triglyceride, phospholipid when tried
on various animals and human beings. It protected LDL against the depletion of
lipid constituents such as cholesterol, triglycerides and phospholipids as well as the
conversion of cholesterol into oxygenated cholesterol. This protective action may be
due to its free radical scavenging properties. This compound signiﬁcantly inhibited
the generation of hydoxyl radicals in enzymatic systems. Ahluwalia and Amma (1988)
studied the effects of oral ingestion of the gum and its effect on the faecal excretion of
cholesterol and bile acids in hypo- and hypercholesterolaemic rats. Sharma et al. (1988)
investigated the effect of a mixture of alcohol extract of Triphala and petroleum ether
extract of gum. Verma et al. (1988) tried it in the patients of hyperlipidaemia. Kulkarni
and Paranjape (1990) and Kulkarni (1991) tried a preparation containing guggal
with Triphala and minerals in obesity. Saukhala et al. (1992) used this gum in pre-
venting diet-induced hypercholesterolaemia in rats. Duwiejua et al. (1993) studied anti-
inﬂammatory activity in the oleoresins of the plant family Burseraceae. Bhatt et al.
(1994) conducted a trial on obese patients by dividing the volunteers into two groups.
One group just conducted standardized physical exercises, while the other group
used guggul preparations whilst carrying out the physical exercises. After the study it
was concluded that guggal has a deﬁnite effect on lowering the body weight. Patel
et al. (1995) tried it in obese patients. Guggulsterone was found to be a potent
hypolipidaemic agent, which prevented oxidation of low density lipoprotein (Kavita
Singh et al. 1997).

As an anti-inﬂammatory agent
Chaurasia et al. (1995) carried out research on antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatory
properties of the guggal-containing drug. The various uses documented are:

For sciatica Nair et al. (1978), Tyagi and Prasad (1995).

For inﬂammatory pains Purushottam Dev (1979).

For rheumatic arthritis Pandit and Shukla (1981), Shukla et al. (1985), Pandey
and Sharma (1986), Vyas and Shukla (1987) tried pure guggal whilst Majumdar
(1984) used a polyherbal preparation and a guggal preparation containing gold.
Kishore et al. (1987) carried out clinical studies with the preparation Sunthi-guggal
containing Commiphora with ginger. Chandrasekharan et al. (1994) worked on an
Ayurvedic preparation. Sannd and Kumari (1994) used a compound preparation in
osteoarthritis.
                                                                            Guggal 131
For fractures   Panda (1990) prepared a plaster with lac and guggal.

In cervical spondylitis Mehra and Gurdip Singh (1986).

In heart diseases

Guggal was evaluated for ﬁbrinolytic activity and platelet aggregation in coronary
artery disease (Bordia and Chuttani, 1979, Baldwa et al. 1980), as a cardioprotective
agent in patients of coronary artery disease, hypertension and diabetes mellitus (Arora
et al. 1995).
   An Ayurvedic preparation Pushkar Guggal, in which guggal is used with Inula
racemosa, was effective as an anti-anginal and hypolipidaemic agent in coronary heart
disease (Singh et al. 1993, Dubey et al. 1995).

In skin diseases
Guggulipid gave good results when taken orally in acne vulgaris (Dogra et al. 1990).

Anthelmintic activity
Kakrani and Kalyani (1984) noted the anthelmintic activity of essential oils. Bagi
et al. (1985) also carried out pharmacological studies on the essential oil.

In leucorrhoea
Rao et al. (1985) used a compound preparation of Phyllanthus emblica and guggal.

In thyroid stimulation
Tripathi et al. (1984), Singh et al. (1985), Tripathi et al. (1988) studied thyroid
stimulation using a constituent obtained from the gum, z-guggalosterone.

In urinary tract infection
Gokshuradi Guggal made from a gum of guggal, Tribulus terrestris and other herbs was
tried in urinary tract infections (Upadhyaya and Singh, 1979).

Review
Kakrani (1981) and Satyawati (1988) has reviewed this drug.

References
Agrawal, R.C., Singh, S.P., Saran, R.K., Das, S.K., Sinha, M., Asthana, O.P., Gupta, P.P.,
  Nityanand, S., Dhawan, B.N., Agarwal, S.S. (1986) Clinical trials of guggulipid-a new
  hypolipidemic agent of plant origin in primary hypolipidaemia. Indian Journal of Medical
  Research, 84, 624–634.
132 Guggal
Ahluwalia, P., Amma, M.K.P (1988) Effect of oral ingestion of oleo-resin of gum guggal on
  the fecal excretion of cholesterol and bile acids in hypo- and hypercholesterolemic rats.
  Research Bulletin Panjab University, 39, 53–55.
Arora, R.B., Gupta, L., Sharma, R.C., Gupta, S.K. (1973) A standardisation of Indian indi-
  genous drugs and preparations. III Standardisation of Yogaraj Guggulu with reference to its
  anti–inﬂammatory activity. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, 8, 20–24.
Arora, R.B., Sharma, J.N., Shastri, H. (1982) Beneﬁcial effect of fraction of gum guggal in
  arthritic syndrome and liver function in clinical and experimental arthritis. Rheumatism, 18,
  9–16.
Arora, R.C., Agarwal, N., Arora, S. (1995) Evaluation of CTI (cardioprotective drug) in
  subjects of coronary artery disease, hypertension and diabetes mellitus. Flora and Fauna, 1,
  203–205.
Autarkar, D.S., Pande, R., Athavale, A.V., Saoji, S.R., Shah, K.N., Jakhmola, A.T., Vaddya,
  A.B. (1984) Phase I Tolerability study of Yogarajguggulu, a popular Ayurvedic drug.
  Journal Postgraduate Medicine, 30, 111–115.
Bagi, M.K., Kakrani, H.K., Kalyani, C.A., Datyanarayana, D., Manvi, F.V. (1985) Preliminary
  pharmacological studies of essential oil from Commiphora mukul. Fitoterapia, 56, 245–248.
Baldwa, V.S., Sharma, R.C., Ranka. P.C., Chittora, M.D. (1980) Effect of Commiphora mukul
  (guggal) on ﬁbrinolytic activity and platelet aggregation in coronary artery disease. Rajasthan
  Medical Journal, 19, 84–86.
Bhatt, A.D., Dalal, D.G., Shah, S.J., Joshi, B.A., Gajjar, M.N., Vaidya, R.A., Vaidya, R.B.,
  Autarkar, D.S. Challenge of assessing efﬁcacy of guggulu in obesity. Pointers from a naturalistic
  trial. Update-94, Ayurveda, Bombay, 24–26 Feb., 1994.
Bordia, A., Chuttani, S.K. (1979) Effect of gum guggulu on ﬁbrinolysis and platelet adhesiveness
  in coronary heart disease. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 70, 992–996.
Chandrasekharan, A.N., Porkodi, R., Radhamadhavan, Parthiban, M., Bhatt, N.S. (1994)
  Study of Ayurvedic drugs in rheumatoid arthritis compared to auranoﬁn. Indian Practitioner,
  57, 489–502.
Chaurasia, S., Tripathi, P., Tripathi, Y.B. (1995) Antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatory property
  of Sandhika: a compound herbal drug. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 33, 428– 432.
Dogra, J., Aneja, N., Saxena, V.N. (1990) Oral gugulipid in acne vulgaris management. Indian
  Journal of Dermatology, Venerology and Leprology, 56, 381–383.
Dubey, G.P., Singh, S., Mishra, A.K. Effects of Pushkar-guggulu on body composition in
  CHD cases. Seminar on Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, CCRAS, New Delhi, India, 20–22
  March, 1995.
Duwiejua, M., Zeitlin, I.J., Waterman, P.G., Chapman, J., Mhango, G.J., Proven G.J. (1993)
  Anti-inﬂammatory activity of resins from some species of the plant Burseraceae. Planta
  Medica, 59, 12–16.
Gopal, K., Saran, K.K., Nityanand, S., Gupta, P.P., Hasan, M., Das, M., Sinha, N., Agarwal,
  S.S. (1986) Clinical trials of ethyl acetate extract of gum guggal (guggulipid) in primary
  hyperlipidaemia. Journal Association of Physicians of India, 34, 249–251.
Gupta, M., Tripathi, S.N., Prasad, B. (1974) Effect of extract of gum guggulu on estrogen-
  induced hyperlipidemia in chicks. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, 9, 4–11.
Gupta, M., Tripathi, S.N., Upadhyay, B.N. (1978) Assessment of hypocholestrolemic and
  hypolipidemic action of Commiphora mukul in human beings suffering from lipid disorders.
  Antiseptic, 75, 271–275.
Kakrani, H.K. (1981) Guggal – a review. Indian Drugs, 18, 417– 421.
Kakrani, H.K., Kalyani, G.A. (1984) Anthelmintic activity of essential oil of Commiphora
  mukul. Fitoterapia, 55, 232–234.
Kishore, P., Devi Das. K.V., Banerjee, S. (1987) Clinical studies on the treatment of amvata-
  rheumatoid arthritis with sunthi-guggal. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 3,
  133–146.
                                                                                 Guggal 133
Kotiyal, J.P., Singh, D.S., Bisht, D.B. (1985) Gum guggulu (Commiphora mukul) fraction A in
   obesity – A double blind clinical trial. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1, 20–35.
Kulkarni, P.H. (1991) Clinical study of effect of sookshma (subtle) Triphala Guggulu (TG3X)
   in obesity. Deerghayu International, 7, 17–22.
Kulkarni, P.H., Paranjape, P. (1990) Clinical assessment of Ayurvedic anti-obesity drugs. A
   double blind placebo controlled trial. Journal of the National Integrated Medical Association,
   32, 7–11.
Kuppurajan, K., Rajagopalan, S.S., Koteswara, Rao, Vijayalakshmi, A.N., Dwarkananth, C.
   (1973) Effect of Guggulu (Commiphora mukul Engl.) on serum lipids in obese subjects.
   Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, 8, 1–8.
Majumdar, A. (1979) Clinical studies of drugs (Bhallatak, Gourakh & Guggulu) in rheumatoid
   arthiritis. Rheumatism, 14, 118–130.
Majumdar, K.A. (1984) Role of gum guggulu with gold in rheumatic and other allied diseases.
   Rheumatism, 20, 9–15.
Malhotra, C.L., Agarwal, Y.K., Mehta, V.L., Prasad, S. (1970) The effect of various fractions of
   gum guggal on experimentally produced hypercholesterolemia in chicks. Indian Journal of
   Medical Research, 58, 394.
Mehra, B.L., Gurdip Singh (1986) A comparative study on the effect of Nirgundi Pak, Pinda
   Sneha and Suddh Guggal (controlled temperature) on the patients of Griva Hundanam
   (cervical spondylosis). Rheumatism, 21, 88.
Nair, P.R.C., Vijayan, N.P., Pillai, B.K.R., Venkatraghavan, S. (1978) The effect of Nirgundi
   Panchang and Guggal in sodhna cum samana and samana treatment of Gridhrasi (sciatica).
   Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, Yoga and Homeopathy, 13, 13–18.
Nandkarni, K.M. (1954) Indian Materia Medica. Part I. Popular Prakashan, Bombay.
Panda, M. (1990) The effect of Laksha Guggulu in the clinical management of fracture. Journal
   of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 11, 13–18.
Pandey, V.K., Sharma, A.K. (1986) Evaluation of Vatahari Guggal and Nadivaspa sweda in
   the management of rheumatic diseases. Rheumatism, 22, 1–6.
Pandit, M.M., Shukla, C.P. (1981) Study of shuddha guggulu on rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumat-
   ism, 16, 54–67.
Patil, N.D., Dewoolkar, Chheda, M.S. (1995) Effect of guggal on lipid proﬁle and glycosylated
   HB in obese subjects, Project report. Biorhythm, 57–59.
Purushottam Dev (1979) Assessment of the ability of Vatari Guggulu to modify inﬂammatory
   pain. Rheumatism, 14, 39–44.
Rao, T.S., Kusuma Kumari, Netaji, B., Subhakta, P.K.J.P. (1985) A pilot study of svetpradra
   (leucorrhoea) with Amalaka guggulu. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 6, 213–237.
Sannd, B.N., Kumari, K. (1994) Preliminary clinical trial of Trikushtha guggulu in the
   treatment of sandhigatavata (osteoarthritis). Sachitra Ayurveda, 46, 765–771.
Satyavati, G.V. (1988) Gum guggal (Commiphora mukul ) – The success story of an ancient
   insight leading to a modern discovery. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 87, 327–335.
Satyavati, G.V., Dwarkantah, C., Tripathi, S.N. (1969) Experimental studies on the
   hypocholesterolemic effect of Commiphora mukul Engl (Guggal). Indian Journal of Medical
   Research, 57, 1950–1962.
Saukhala, A., Mathur, P.N., Saukhala, A.K., Dashora, P.K. (1992) Comparative efﬁciency of
   Shilajeet and gum guggal (Commiphora mukul) in preventing diet-induced hypercholestero-
   lemia in Wistar rats. Indian Journal of Clinical Biochemistry, 7, 45– 48.
Shanavaskhan, A.E., Binu, S., Unnithan, M.D., Santoshkumar, E.S., Pushpangadan, P. (1997)
   Detoxiﬁcation techniques of traditional physicians of Kerala, India on some toxic herbal
   drugs. Fitoterapia, 68, 69–74.
Sharma, J.N., Rajpal, M.N., Rao, T.S., Gupta, S.K. (1988) Some pharmacological investigations
   on the alcoholic extract of Triphala alone and in combination with petroleum ether extract
   of oleo-gum resin of Commiphora mukul. Indian Drugs, 25, 220–223.
134 Guggal
Sharma, K., Puri, A.S., Sharma, R., Prakash, S. (1976) Effect of gum guggal on serum lipids in
   obese subjects. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, Yoga and Homoeopathy, 11, 132–134.
Shukla, K.P., Singh, S.P., Kishore, N., Singh, D.R., Srivastava, S. (1985) Evaluation of Rasanadi
   Guggulu compound in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatism, 21, 16–15.
Singh, A.K., Tripathi, S.N., Prasad, G.C. (1983) Response of Commiphora mukul (Guggulu) on
   melatonin-induced hyperthyroidism. Ancient Science of Life, 3, 85–90.
Singh, A.K., Tripathi, S.N., Prasad, G.C. (1985) Hormonal response of thyroid gland to
   Commiphora mukul and LATS in tissue culture. Bulletin Ethno-Botanical Research, 6, 155–164.
Singh, K., Chander, R., Kapoor, N.K. (1997) Guggulsterone, a potent hypolipidemic, prevents
   oxidation of low density lipoprotein. Phytotherapy Research, 11, 291–294.
Singh, R., Singh, R.P., Batliwala, P.G., Upadhyaya, B.N., Tripathi, S.N. (1993) Puskara-
   Guggulu-an antianginal and hypolipidemic agent in coronary heart disease (CHD). Journal
   of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 12, 1–18.
Tripathi, S.N., Gupta, M., Dwivedi, L.D., Sen, S.P. (1975) Regression of hyperlipidemia with
   an active principle of Commiphora mukul. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, Yoga and
   Homoeopathy, 10, 11–16.
Tripathi, Y.B., Malhotra, O.P., Tripathi, S.N. (1984) Thyroid stumulating action of z-
   guggulosteron obtained from Commiphora mukul. Planta Medica, 50, 78–80.
Tripathi, Y. B., Tripathi, A., Malhotra, O.P., Tripathi, S.N. (1988) Thyroid stimulating action
   of (z) guggalsterone. Mechanism of action. Planta Medica, 54, 271–277.
Tyagi, M.K., Prasad, R.D. Clinical evaluation of the effect of Trayodshang guggulu and
   Vistundak vati in the management of Gridhrasi. Seminar on Research in Ayurveda and Siddha,
   CCRAS, New Delhi (India), 20–22 March, 1995.
Upadhyaya, G.P., Singh, R.H. (1979) Clinical trials of popular indigenous compounds. Part II.
   Clinical and microbiological studies on the role of Goksuradi Guggulu in urinary tract
   infection with obstructive uropathy (Mutrakricchra). Journal of Research in Indian Medicine,
   Yoga and Homoeopathy, 14, 25–33.
Varadani, B.V. (1973) Obesity and it’s treatment by an indigenous drug LIPIDEX. Indian
   Medical Gazaette, 13, 33–43.
Verma, S.K., Barodia, A. (1988) Effect of Commiphora mukul (gum guggulu) in patients of
   hyperlipidemia with special reference to HDL cholesterol. Indian Journal of Medical Research,
   87, 356–360.
Vyas, S.N., Shukla, C.P. (1987) A clinical study on the effect of Shuddha guggulu in rheumatic
   arthritis. Rheumatism, 23, 15–26.
                                                                          Haritaki 135

23 Haritaki




    Terminalia chebula Retz.
    Family: Combretaceae


THE TREE AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is a medium-sized tree with dark brown bark and elliptic oblong, broad leaves
(Fig. 14). The mature fruit is more or less a ﬁve angled drupe, 2.5 to 4 cm long,
usually obovoid and glabrous. The tree grows in the sub-Himalayan tract and in the
deciduous forests of India. It is commonly known by the name harar.
   As per Hindu mythology, the tree originated from a few drops of nectar, which fell
from heaven on the ground. Because of this divine origin, it has been given various
names showing its virtues, such as Haritaki – born in the abode of Hara (Lord Shiva)
on Himalayas, Vijaya – victorious or conquers all the diseases, Rohini – heals the
wounds, ulcers, Amrita – nectar, Shakla sreshta – the best of all, Abhya – not fearful of
any diseases, Airytha – cures all diseases, Pramatha – eradicates the disease from the
source, Amogh – always beneﬁcial, Kayastha – sustains the body, Pratpathya – ex-
tremely whole some, Divya – divine in nature, Prananda – offering life, Jiva, Jivanti,
Jivanika – life promoting, Putana- sanctifying, Shreyasi – conferring prosperity, Chataki
– increasing vitality, Balyi – gives strength, Jivya priya – liked by all, Bhisak priya –
loved by physicians, Pachoni – digestive.
   It has been considered a Rasayana since ancient times. Lord Budha and Guru
Padmasambhav, the great Budhist sage who was instrumental in spreading Budhism
beyond Himalayas, kept this fruit in their laps (Fig. 15). In ancient times the reputation
of this fruit spread from India to the Middle East, and from there to Greece. Kabul
(Afghanistan) became the biggest centre of its trade.
   In earlier Ayurvedic texts, seven types of haritaki are mentioned, but now in India
following three types are well known:

1   Harar Jangi or Haleileh e Jung or Bal haritaki: It is the immature fruit, black in
    colour and smaller in size.
2   Harar: It is available in different shapes and sizes. It is lustrous brown to
    greyish brown in colour. It may be sold as such, but very often the seed
    (stone) is separated from the pulp and the dry pulp is sold as chilka (cover)
    harar.
136 Haritaki




    Figure 14 Terminalia chebula A twig, B young fruit, C dry fruit, D young dried fruit.




3   Harar Kabuli: It is about double the size of common haritaki fruit and is preferred
    for Rasayana treatment. It is so heavy that it sinks in water. The name Kabuli
    means from Kabul, the capital of Afghanistan, which at one time was a big centre
    for the trade of this fruit. It is very expensive (more than ten times the price of the
    common variety), so it is sometimes adulterated with moulded fruits made from
    haritaki powder. Tuber of Exogonium purga Benth. (Ipomoea jalap) which is called
    Jalap Harar is a common substitute for this fruit. Jalap tuber not only superﬁ-
    cially resembles Kabuli Harada in shape but also in its laxative action. It is a
    strong purgative. Jalap Harar is a tuber without a stone so it can be differen-
    tiated from Kabuli Harar on the basis of morphological characteristics. It has
    striations on the outer surface and its powder causes a strong burning sensation in
    the mouth.
                                                                           Haritaki 137




    Figure 15 Lord Budha with haritaki in his lap (adopted from a Tibetan painting).



USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

As a good Rasayana it provides nutrition to the body in the same way that a mother
provides to a foetus. The major uses of this fruit are:

As a laxative
In constipation, half a teaspoon of powdered immature fruit with cold water is given
at bedtime. It is not only a good laxative but also regulates bowel movements. It
138 Haritaki
operates rapidly without irritation or heat and can be used for a long time. It has a
beneﬁcial effect on the enlargement of the spleen. If as a result of its administration
the faeces become watery, then the dose is reduced, but if hard, then the dose is
increased. If dry powder is not easy to administer, it is mixed with an equal quantity
of ghee and is given with water or 250 ml of milk. These ﬂuids avoid astringency and
lubricate the alimentary canal. T. chebula is an ingredient of a well-known household
laxative Triphala (p. 28). A preserve called Muraba Harar made by an inﬁltration of
sugar syrup in haritaki is also used as a laxative.

As a Rasayana
Haritaki provides strength to the body and delays the effects of old age. As a Rasayana,
use three grams of harar kabuli powder in the morning when the stomach is empty. In
the ﬁrst half of winter ginger juice is added to haritaki, whilst in the second half long
pepper is used. In the rainy season it is used with salt, in autumn with sugar and in
spring with honey.

As an astringent
Through this activity, it cures spongy gums, ulcers, dysentery and chronic diarrhoea.

Contraindications
It should not be used by lean and thin people, in the case of extreme weakness, by
people with poor digestion, in pregnancy or if there is haemorrhaging in any part of
the body.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

As an anti-spasmodic
Chebulin isolated from the fruit, possesses anti-spasmodic activity resembling that of
papaverine (Thakur et al. 1989).

Hypolipidaemic activity
The feeding of a fraction of fruit extract to rats lowered their levels of low density
lipoprotein lipids and increased the level of high density lipoprotein cholesterol, whilst
reducing hepatic triglyceride (Khanna et al. 1993).

In liver problems
Sohni and Bhatt (1996) tried a compound herbal formulation containing this fruit in
hepatic amoebiasis.
                                                                              Haritaki 139
As a laxative
Tripathi and Tewari (1983) prescribed haritaki for simple constipation. The results
were excellent in 20 per cent of the patients, and good in the rest. No side effects were
observed in any case. Tamhana and Throat (1994) observed that the fruit affected
gastric motility.

As an immunomodulator
The alcohol extract effectively scavenged the oxygen free radicals. It signiﬁcantly
inhibited chemiluminescence of human leucocyte and the bad effects of cigarette
smoke (Fu Naiwu et al. 1992, Sohni and Bhatt 1996).

Cardiotonic property
Awsathi and Nath (1968) isolated a cardiac glycoside and Reddy et al. (1990) a
phenolic compound responsible for cardiotonic activity. These compounds increased
the force of contraction and cardiac output without altering the heart rate. Chebulinic
acid – a major phenolic glycoside had a pronounced cardiotonic property. Its effect was
greater on a hypodynamic heart than on a normal one. Various extracts from the fruit
rind showed inhibition of Na+, K+, Mg2+ ATPase of frog heart muscle, which were
dose dependent (Azeem et al. 1992). Srivastava et al. (1992), Reddy et al. (1994) also
observed a cardiotonic effect of the fruit.

Cytoprotective effect
It had a cytoprotective effect when used with Asparagus racemosus (Dahanukar et al.
1983). The water extract of the fruit exhibited an anti-mutagenic activity when tested
on Salmonella typhimurium (Grover and Saroj Bala, 1992). Hydrolyzable tannins and
related compounds from the fruit had cytotoxic activity (Lee SeungHo, 1995).

Antimicrobial property
Sato et al. (1997) isolated gallic acid and its ester, which were effective against methicillin
resistant Staphylococcus aureus. The aqueous extract of the fruit exhibited very strong
anti-viral activity against duck hepatitis B virus and against HIV-1 protease (Xu
Hong Xi et al. 1996, Chung et al. 1997).

In Uraemia
It is rich in tannins and thus has a uraemic toxin decreasing action (Yokozawa et al.
1995).

Chemical studies
The fruit has 30 to 32 per cent tannins and 13.9 to 16.9 per cent non-tannins. The
tannins are of the pyrogallol type, rich in gallic acid, ellagic acid and a glycoside similar
to sennoside. Chebulin and chebulinic acid have also been reported (Thakur et al. 1989).
140 Haritaki
References
Awasthi, L., Nath, B. (1968) Chemical examination of Terminalia chebula Roxb. Part I. A new
   cardiac glycoside. Journal of Indian Chemical Society, 45, 913.
Azeem, M.A., Reddy, B.M., Appa Rao, A.V.N., Prabhkar, M.C., Prasad, M.S.K. (1992) Effect
   of Terminalia chebula extracts on frog heart muscle (Na+, K+, Mg2+) ATPase activity. Fitoterapia,
   63, 300–303.
Chung, T.H., Kim, J.C., Lee, C.Y., Moon, M.K., Chae, S.C., Lee, I.S., Kim, S.H. Hahn, K.S.,
   Lee, I.P. (1997) Potential antiviral effects of Terminalia chebula, Sanguisorba ofﬁcinalis, Rubus
   coreanus and Rheum palmatum against duck hepatitis B virus (DHBV). Phytotherapy Research,
   11, 179–182.
Dahanukar, S.A., Date, S.G., Karandikar, S.M. (1983) Cyptoprotective effect of Terminalia
   chebula and Asparagus racemosus on gastric mucosa. Indian Drugs, 20, 442– 445.
Fu Naiwu, Quan Lanping, Huang Lei, Zhang Ruyi, Chen Yayan (1992) Antioxidant action of
   extract of Terminalia chebula and its preventive effect on DNA breaks in human white cells
   induced by TPA. Chinese Traditional and Herbal Drugs (in Chinese), 23, 26–29.
Grover, I.S., Saroj Bala (1992) Antimutagenic activity of Terminalia chebula (myroblan) in
   Salmonella typhimurium. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 30, 339–341.
Khanna, A.K., Chander, R., Kapoor, N.K., Singh, C., Srivastava, A.K. (1993) Hypolipidemic
   activity of Terminalia chebula in rats. Fitoterapia, 64, 351–356.
Lee Seung Ho, Ryu ShiYong, Choi SangUn, Lee ChongOck, No ZaeSung, Kim SeongKie, Ahn
   JongWoong (1995) Hydrolysable tannins and related compound having cytotoxic activity
   from the fruits of Terminalia chebula. Archives of Pharmacal Research, 18, 118–120.
Reddy, B.M., Ramesh, M., Appa Rao, A.V.N., Prabhakar, M.C. Isolation and studies on
   cardiotonic activity of active principles from the fruits Terminalia chebula. Proceedings of
   46th Annual Indian Pharmaceutical Congress, Chandigarh, 28–30 December, 1994.
Reddy, V.R.C., Ramana Kumari, S.V., Reddy, B.M., Anzeem, M.A., Prabhakar, M.C., Appa
   Rao, A.V.N. (1990) Cardiotonic activity of the fruit of Terminalia chebula. Fitoterapia, 61,
   517–525.
Sato, Y., Oketani, H., Singyouchi, K., Ohtsubo, T., Kihara, M., Shibata, H., Higuti, T. (1997)
   Extraction and puriﬁcation of effective antimicrobial constituents of Terminalia chebula Rets.
   against methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 20,
   401– 404.
Sohni, Y.R., Bhatt, R.M. (1996) Activity of a crude extract formulation in experimental
   hepatic amoebiasis and in immunomodulation studies. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 54,
   119–124.
Srivastava, R.D., Dwivedi, S., Sreenivasan, K.K., Chandra Shekhar (1992) Cardiovascular ef-
   fects of Terminalia species of plants. Indian Drugs, 29, 144–149.
Tamhana, M.D., Thorat, S.P. Alternations in gastric motility-induced by Ayurvedic agents.
   Update Ayurveda-94, Bombay (India) 24–26 Feb. 1994.
Thakur, R.S., Puri, H.S., Akhtar Hussain Major Medicinal Plants of India. Central Institute of
   Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Lucknow, India 1989.
Tripathi, V.N., Tewari, S.K. (1983) Clinical trials of Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) treatment of
   simple constipation. Sachittar Ayurveda, 35, 733–740.
Xu HongXi, Wan Min, Loh BoonNee, Kon Oilian, Chow Pengwai, Sim KengYeow (1996)
   Screening of traditional medicines for their inhibitory activity against HIV-1 protease.
   Phytotherapy Research, 10, 207–210.
Yokozawa, T., Fujioka, K., Oura, H., Tanaka, T. (1995) Conﬁrmation that tannin containing
   crude drugs have a uraemic toxin decreasing action. Phytotherapy Research, 9, 1–5.
                                                                              Hing 141

24 Hing




    Ferula foetida Regel
    Syn. F. foetida (Bunge) Regel
    F. asafoetida L.
    F. rubricaulis Boiss
    Family: Umbelliferae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is a large perennial herb, with a stem 1.5 to 3 m high, 2.5 to 7.5 cm thick, greenish
and furrowed. The leaves are few, radical and cauline, near the stem base (Fig. 16),
imparipinnate, 45 cm long and 10 to 15 cm broad. Flowers are small, monoecious and
yellow. Oleo-gum resin is obtained from F. foetida and other allied species. These
plants grow in western Afghanistan, Iran and adjoining Turkey in mountain slopes,
desolate wastes and sandy deserts.

Collection of oleoresin
The gum resin consists of milky sap, obtained from an incision of the green matured
root. The oldest plants are most productive and a plant less than four years old is
considered virtually worthless. From March to April, just before ﬂowering, the upper
part of the carrot-shaped root is laid bare and the stem is cut off close to the crown.
The exposed surface is covered by a dome-shaped structure made from twigs and earth.
After a few days the exudative is scraped off and a fresh slice of the root is cut to
gather more latex. This process is continued for up to three months until there is no
more exudate. About 1 kg of gum may be obtained from each plant by this process.

The oleoresin
After collection and drying, the dry latex comes in various forms, such as light to dark
brown lumps or a thick paste and is graded for commercial purposes. It has a garlic-
like smell. It may be powdered either when excessively cold or by drying over freshly
burnt lime or exposure to a current of warm air, then reducing to a low temperature
or diluting with starch or magnesium carbonate (Culbreth, 1927).
   In raw form asafoetida is nauseating so it is often fried in ghee before use. In India,
a compound of asafoetida diluted with starch is often used. It is prepared by boiling
142 Hing




   Figure 16 Ferula asafoetida the plant (diagrammatic).
                                                                              Hing 143
asafoetida, starch and water to obtain a gelatinized mass. On cooling small lumps from
this mixture are made and dried. It is sold under the name of Bandhani Hing or may
be powdered. It is a household name in India and is a constituent of most of spice
mixtures used for cooking. Earlier, in some parts of India, for honouring a guest it was
common practice to smear the plate with a paste of asafoetida before serving dinner.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

Asafoetida is considered anti-spasmodic and hot in effect. It counteracts convulsions,
paralytic attack, cough spasms and breathing obstructions, nervous irritability, depres-
sion and apathy. Because of a strong stimulant effect on the nervous system, it works
as an excellent aphrodisiac. In hysteria it is prescribed with valerian. It is mainly an
ingredient of an Ayurvedic digestive powder Hingvastika churn, used as carminative.

Uses in old western medicine
It was used for hysteria, hypochondriasis, convulsions, spasms, nervous apoplexy, whoop-
ing cough and ﬂatulent constipation. Cerebral excitants were considered synergistic
with it, whilst cerebral and arterial depressants were incompatible (Culbreth, 1927). It
was commonly used in the form of tincture or as an emulsion, which was prepared by
gradually triturating 4 g of asafoetida with 90 ml of water. The dose was 15–30 ml.
A pill, made from equal parts of aloe extract and asafoetida, was also very popular for
hyperacidity. With valerian, tincture asafoetida was commonly prescribed as a remedy
for enuresis, hypochondria and hysteria, as it stimulated the general nervous system
and circulation by raising arterial tension. It stimulated secretions and excretions and
increased libido.

Toxicological studies
The raw asafoetida is nauseating due to essential oils, so it is heated before use.

Reference
Culbreth, D.M.R. A Manual of Materia Medica and Pharmacology. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia,
  USA 1927.
144 Jaiphal and Javitri

25 Jaiphal and Javitri




    Myristica fragrans Houtt.
    Family: Myristicaceae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is indigenous to Moluccas Island, but grows in Java and Sumatra (Indonesia),
Malaysia and is cultivated to a limited extent in Brazil, Granada, South India and Sri
Lanka at an elevation of 300 m, along the sea coast in the tropical climate (Farrel,
1985). The name nutmeg is misleading as the seed is not a nut. It is a small evergreen
tree, with alternate, oblong ovate, acute, entire, smooth dark green leaves (Fig. 17A).
The ﬂowers are small and pale yellow. The fruit is oval, smooth, lustrous and when the
kernel is cut, dark veins are clearly visible due to the presence of aromatic oils.
   The fruit cover is hard, about 2 cm long, oval to ovoid, enclosing mace, which is an
outer covering on the nutmeg seed (Fig. 17B, C, D). On drying it separates from the
seed as an orange-yellow papery material. It is used along with nutmeg in most cases.
The mace is also sold under the name ﬂower of the nutmeg tree (Ratsch, 1997).
   Nutmeg has been used in most of the world for its stimulating effect, for its love-
inciting property and as an aphrodisiac due to myristicin in its essential oil. The
bigger fruits are preferred for medicinal purposes. Ingestion of several teaspoons of
nutmeg can give mild hallucinogenic experiences, perceptual distortions, euphoria,
mild visual hallucinations and a feeling of unreality. The active compounds myristicin
and elimicin are somewhat like mescaline in action. Myristicin was the starting point
for the love drug MDA or ecstasy. It appears to be transformed in vivo into highly
active amphetamine derivatives (Ratsch, 1997).


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

The tree is not a native of India but both mace and nutmeg are frequently mentioned
in Ayurvedic literature. It is said to have saffron-like activity. According to Ayurveda,
nutmeg is bitter, pungent, hot in effect, pleasant, light, digestant, anti-kaph and anti-
vata. It helps bronchial troubles, nausea, vomiting and heart troubles. It is used in
delirium tremens, insomnia and senile debility.
   Being strong and hot in nature, it has a special effect on the nervous system and
thus helps in sexual inadequacies. It has an irritating effect on the mucous membrane.
                                                                 Jaiphal and Javitri 145




    Figure 17 Myristica fragrans A twig, B fresh fruit cut open to show mace, C transection
              of the fruit, D nutmeg.



THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

As a sedative
Bhagwat and Saiﬁ (1980) studied the pharmacological action of volatile oils. It exhib-
ited a sedative and skeletal muscle depressant effect. It produced a direct relaxant
effect on the smooth muscles of the intestine, which was comparable to that produced
by adrenaline. Shin et al. (1988) isolated a hepatic drug metabolism inhibitor from
nutmeg. It signiﬁcantly prolonged hexobarbital-induced sleeping time. Other tests
conﬁrmed CNS depressant properties in nutmeg.
146 Jaiphal and Javitri
Effects on digestive system
Rashid and Misra (1984) observed that the aqueous extract of the seed’s paste had a
marked inhibitory effect on the antienterotoxigenic effect produced by Escherichia coli.
Shidore et al. (1985) found that the petroleum ether and water extract of nutmeg had
anti-diarrhoeal activity, while the petroleum ether extract, when used alone, had anti-
inﬂammatory properties. Chabra and Rao (1994) studied changes in the liver enzymatic
system.

Hypolipidaemic effects
Hattori et al. (1993) found that mace had an inhibitory effect on lipids. Alpana Ram
et al. (1996) studied the nutmeg extract for hypolipidaemic effect.

Chemical studies
Mace contains 11–15 per cent essential oil, while nutmeg has 16 per cent. Nutmeg also
contains ﬁxed oil 24–30 per cent of fatty oils, known as nutmeg butter (Farrell, 1985).

Toxicological studies
Hallstrom and Thuvander (1997) carried out a toxicological evaluation of myristicin,
the major component of nutmeg.

Adulterants
M. malabarica is a large tree, growing in South India. It has fruits bigger than nutmeg
but they are not aromatic. Nutmeg is often adulterated or substituted with these seeds.

References
Alpana Ram, Lauria, P., Rajeev Gupta, Sharma, V.N. (1996) Hypolipidemic effect of Myristica
  fragrans fruit extract in rabbits. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 55, 49–53.
Chabra, S.K., Rao, A.R. (1994) Transmammary modulation of xenobiotic enzymes in liver of
  mouse pups by mace (Myristica fragrans Houtt.) Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 42, 167–177.
Bhagwat, A.W., Saiﬁ, A.Q. (1980) Observations on the pharmaceutical actions of the volatile
  oil of Myristica fragrans (Houtt). Journal of Scientiﬁc Research (Bhopal), 20, 183–186.
Farrell, K.T. Spices, Condiments and Seasoning. Avi Publishing, Westport, Co., USA 1985.
Hallstrom, H., Thuvander, A. (1997) A toxicological evaluation of myristicin. Natural Toxins,
  5, 186–192.
Hattori, M., Yang, X.W., Miyashiro, H., Namba, T. (1993) Inhibitory effects of monomeric
  and dimeric phenylpropanoids from mace on lipid peroxidation in vitro and vivo. Phytotherapy
  Research, 7, 395–401.
Rashid, A., Misra, D.S. (1984) Antienterotoxigenic effect of Myristica fragrans (nutmeg) on
  enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 79, 694–696.
Ratsch, Christian Plants of Love. The History of Aphrodisiacs and a Guide to their Identiﬁcation and
  Uses. Ten Speed Press, Berkeley CA, USA 1997.
Shidore, P.P., Majumdar, S.M., Shrotri, D.S., Majumdar, A.M. (1985) Antidiarrhoeal and antiin-
  ﬂammatory activity of nutmeg extracts. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 47, 188–190.
Shin, K.H., Kim, O.N., Woo, W.S. (1988) Isolation of hepatic drug metabolism inhibitors
  from the seeds of Myristica fragrans. Archives of Pharmacal Research, 11, 240–243.
                                                                      Kabab Chini    147

26 Kabab Chini




    Piper cubeba L f.
    Family: Piperaceae

It is also known as sheetalchini in commerce. The Sanskrit name is kankol.


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It grows wild in Borneo, and on the Indonesian islands of Java and Sumatra. It is
cultivated in Sri Lanka and in some parts of Karnataka, in south India. It is a
perennial, woody, evergreen creeper (Fig. 18A) with conspicuous nodes. The leaves are
round to cordate, lanceolate, smooth, leathery, shining, glabrous, 15 cm long, with
conspicuous vein islets. The ﬂower is inconspicuous in 2.5 to 5 cm long bunches. The
fruit is round like black pepper (Fig. 18B) 3–6 mm broad, with a brown to dark
brown pericarp, coarsely reticulate. The fruit has a strong aroma, and characteristically
pungent taste. The fruit is collected when fully developed but unripe.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

The drug of commerce is like black pepper. It is round, wrinkled, black with a small
stalk at one end. When chewed it imparts an aroma and a cooling sensation like that
of peppermint. Because of this characteristic it is called sheetal, which means cooling.
It is bitter and pungent, sometimes used alone but often with P. betle leaves or other
ingredients. It is said to increase the sex drive. Cubeba cigarettes are made by taking
two parts P. cubeba, 1 part Datura leaves, 1 part peppermint leaves, and are used as a
mild aphrodisiac and also in acute or chronic bronchitis. A medicated wine can also be
prepared by immersing crushed seed in white wine (Ratsch, 1997).
   In Ayurveda, it is considered a stimulant, digestive, diuretic and cardiotonic, hav-
ing hot effect on the body. It has a strong antiseptic action, so it is used for venereal
diseases. The seed’s paste is applied to aches, pains, and inﬂammation. The oil distilled
from the seed is applied as an antiseptic to wounds. It is particularly useful for mouth
and throat infections.
   In western medicine, it was earlier used for gonorrhoea, urethritis, vesical irritabil-
ity, cystitis, prostate gland, abscesses, piles, chronic bronchitis and catarrh (Culbreth,
1927). The dose was 4–5 g powder and 5–20 drops oil.
   It is also used as follows:
148 Kabab Chini




    Figure 18 Piper cubeba A twig, B seed.




As an aphrodisiac
It is an ingredient of aphrodisiac preparations made with Withania, Mucuna, Orchis in
the form of a candy.
                                                                     Kabab Chini    149
For chronic syphilis
I. Mix powders of kabab chini (100 g), sodium bicarbonate (100 g) and alum (50 g).
Take one teaspoonful twice daily with yogurt.
II. To one cup of boiling water, add one teaspoonful of kabab chini to make an
infusion. When warm add 5 drops of Santalum album oil to this infusion. This preparation
has a diuretic and an antiinﬂammatory effect.

For urethritis
Take 5 g of ﬁne powder with sugar. Avoid fried, spicy food.

For piles
Take half a spoon of the herb twice daily with milk.

For chronic bronchitis
Mix a teaspoonful of ﬁne powder of herb in honey.

For spermatorrhoea
Make a ﬁne powder of 10 g each of kabab chini, cardamom seed, bamboo manna and
long pepper. Add 40 g of sugar to it. Take half teaspoon twice daily with milk.

Ayurvedic preparation

Dhatu paushtik churn

Method Make a ﬁne powder of 10 g each of kabab chini, shatawari, gokshru, bamboo
manna, Sida cordifolia seed, Polygonum aviculare, Smilax chinesis, processed Mucuna seed,
long pepper, vidarikand and Withania. To this add 60 g of ﬁne Operculina turpethum
powder and 200 g sugar, and make a homogenous mixture.

Dose One spoon twice daily with milk for 2–3 months. Avoid spicy and fried food.

Use For making the body strong so as to have thick and viscous semen. It helps
impotence, premature ejaculation, spermatorrhoea and in other sexual inadequacies.

Chemical studies
12–20 per cent essential oil, 6.4 to 8.5 per cent oleoresin, 3 to 4 per cent cubebin.
Cubebol and cubic acid have been isolated from the seed.

Toxicological studies
It may cause headaches, giddiness, nausea, purging and paralysis. It is excreted by the
bronchial mucous membrane, skin and kidneys and imparts a peculiar colour to urine.
150 Kabab Chini
References
Culbreth, D.M.R. A Manual of Materia Medica and Pharmacology. Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia,
  USA 1927.
Ratsch, Christian Plants of Love. The History of Aphrodisiacs and a Guide to their Identiﬁcation and
  Uses. Ten Speed Press, Berkeley, CA, USA 1997.
                                                                            Kalmegh 151

27 Kalmegh




    Andrographis paniculata (Burm. f.) Wall. ex Nees.
    Family: Acanthaceae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It grows wild as an under-shrub in tropical, moist deciduous forests of India.
   It is an annual herb or small shrub, branches are sharply quadrangular, often nar-
rowly winged towards the apical region. Leaves are petiolate, 5–8 cm long, lanceolate
and acute. Flowers are small, solitary in panicle (Fig. 19). Fruits are 20 mm long,
3 mm wide, linear oblong acute at both ends. Seed are numerous, yellowish brown
and glabrous.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

At one time many Swertia spp. (Indian name chirayta) were well esteemed as bitter
tonics. These herbs grew in the temperate Himalayas, but because of over-exploitation
these plants became scarce and hence expensive. Andrographis which has widespread
distribution in India, was found to be a good substitute for Swertia, and it became
popular as Hara (green) chirayta. It is well known as kalmegh in Ayurveda and some-
times as kirayta. It is sold as such in dry form; sometimes the leaves get separated,
exposing the black twigs. Its main uses are as follows:

As a febrifuge
The herb is a bitter tonic and a febrifuge. It was included in the earlier editions of
Indian pharmacopoeia. In Bengal (an Indian State), a preparation called Alui is pre-
pared by taking powder of cumin and the seed of Amomum subulatum in the juice of
this herb. Alui is prescribed for malaria.

For the digestive system
It encourages appetite and aids digestion. It is also used in dysentery, as an anthelmintic,
stomachic, a liver stimulant, choleretic, cholagaogue, for jaundice, hepatotoxicity, etc.
Decoction of the herb has been used for sluggish liver and in a certain form of
152 Kalmegh




  Figure 19 Andrographis paniculata twig.


dyspepsia, associated with gaseous distension. For children suffering from liver torpid-
ity a dose of 5 g of the herb twice daily is adequate until cured


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Anti-allergic activity
The bitter principles andrographolide and neoandrographolide showed signiﬁcant anti-
PCA (passive cutaneous anaphylaxis) and mast cell stabilizing activities. These activi-
ties were comparable to that of cromoglycate (Gupta et al. 1998). Madav et al. (1998)
conﬁrmed the anti-allergic activity of andrographolide. This compound signiﬁc-
antly decreased degranulation of rat mast cells and reduced its liberation.
                                                                             Kalmegh 153
Effect on the liver
The action of the herb is entirely on gustatory nerves, resulting in increased ﬂows
of saliva and gastric juices. Handa and Sharma (1990a,b) showed hepatoprotective
activity of andrographolides against galactosamine, paracetamol and carbon tetrachlo-
ride-induced intoxication in rats. Andrographolides brought about complete norma-
lization of toxin-induced effects. Sarma and Tripathi (1992) found the herb effective
in viral hepatitis. Andrographolides produced a signiﬁcant dose dependent effect, as
evidenced by increases in bile ﬂow, bile salts and bile acids (Tripathi and Tripathi,
1991, Shukla et al. 1992). Visen et al. (1991, 1992) evaluated the hepatoprotective
activity of andrographolide. These authors (Visen et al. 1992) carried out in vitro
studies by using andrographolide on primary cultured rat hepatocytes. A curative
effect against galactosamine toxicity was found. It protected rat hepatocytes against
paracetamol-induced damage. It was more potent than silymarin, a standard hepato-
protective agent obtained from Silybium marianum. Pretreatment of rats with andro-
grapholide signiﬁcantly prevented the toxic effects of paracetamol, as judged by cell
viability, certain biochemical markers and altered enzyme levels towards normal, which
suggests it acts upon plasma membranes (Visen et al. 1993). The herb was effective
against anti-human immunodeﬁciency virus type I (HIV-I) (Otake et al. 1995).
Alcohol extract of the herb and two of its constituent diterpenes, andrographolide and
neoandrographolide, showed signiﬁcant antihepatotoxic action in Plasmodium berghei-
induced hepatic damage in Mastomys natalensis. These preparations decreased the levels
of liver peroxidation production and facilitated the recovery of superoxide dismutase
and glycogen (Ramesh Chander et al. 1995).
   Premila (1995), Bhatt and Bhatt (1996) have reviewed the literature on hepato-
protective effect of Andrographis in vivo, in animal studies, in vitro assays and in clinical
trials.

Anti-ulcerogenic activity
The compound apigenin, isolated from the herb, exhibited dose-dependent anti-ulcer
activity in Shay rats, histamine-induced ulcers in guinea pigs and aspirin-induced
ulcers in rats (Vishwanathan et al. 1981).

Anti-inﬂammatory activity
In induced oedema, the herb gave a mean inhibition percentage of 65.35 per cent,
compared with 76.50 per cent by butazone (Tajudin et al. 1983). Madav et al. (1995)
found analgesic, anti-pyretic and anti-ulcerogenic activity in andrographolides. Madav
et al. (1996), Shukla et al. (1992) noted that the herb had a good effect against all types
of inﬂammatory agents. It also inhibited acetic acid-induced vascular permeability.

Effect on common cold
Hancke et al. (1995) observed this herb had a positive effect on common colds and
sinusitis, with symptomatic relief and reduced duration of symptoms. There was a
reduction in body temperature in 70 of 84 patients. In pharyngo-tonsilitis it was as
effective as acetaminophen. It gave relief to all the patient’s symptoms (Melchior,
1996/97).
154 Kalmegh
Immunostimulant property
Water extract of the herb caused humoral immune response stimulation and cellular
immune response suppression (Sutarjadi et al. 1991, Saxena, 1992). It caused signiﬁcant
stimulation of antibodies and delayed hypersensitivity responses to sheep red blood
cells in mice. It also stimulated non-speciﬁc immune responses. It appears that com-
pounds other than andrographolides in the herb are responsible for this activity (Puri
et al. 1993).

In cardiac diseases
The herb was found to be an effective anti-thrombogenic agent in treating arterial
thrombotic diseases. An anti-platelet aggregation effect on blood samples of volun-
teers was seen (Huo and Jinzhi, 1989). The ﬂavone extract from the root prevented the
formation of thrombi, as well as the development of myocardial infraction in dogs
(Zhao and Fang, 1991). Andrographis prevented the atherosclerotic arterial stenosis
and restenosis after angioplasty. Hypotensive properties in various fractions have
been observed (Zhang and Tan, 1997; Wang and Zhao, 1997).

In leukaemia
The methanol extract of A. paniculata is reported to cause cell differentiation in mouse
myeloid leukaemia cells. To conﬁrm this Matsuda et al. (1994) isolated various com-
pounds from this herb. Out of three diterpenoids isolated, two new compounds and
andrographolides were found to be active.


CHEMICAL STUDIES

The diterpenoid and sesquiterpenoid compounds have been referred to as
andrographolides.

Toxicological studies
When various concentrations of standardized extracts of herb were used for 60 days
and evaluated using reproductive organ weight, testicular histology, ultra structural
analysis of Leydig’s cells and testosterone levels, no testicular toxicity was found
(Burgos et al. 1997).

References
Bhatt, A.D., Bhatt, N.S. (1996) Indigenous drugs and liver diseases. Indian Journal of Gastroen-
  terology, 15, 63–67.
Burgos, R.A., Caballero, E.E., Sanchez, N.S., Schroeder, R.A., Wikman, G.K., Hancke, J.L.
  (1997) Testicular toxicity assessment of Andropgraphis paniculata dried extract in rats. Journal
  of Ethnopharmacology, 58, 219–224.
Gupta, P.P., Tandon, J.S., Patnaik, G.K. (1998) Antiallergic activity of andrographolides
  isolated from Andrographis paniculata (Burm.f ) Wall. Pharmaceutical Biology, 36, 172–174.
Hancke, J., Burgos, R., Caceres, D., Wikman, G. (1995) A double blind study with a new
  mono drug Kan Jang: decrease of symptoms and improvement in the recovery from common
  colds. Phytotherapy Research, 9, 559–562.
                                                                                    Kalmegh 155
Handa, S.S., Sharma, A. (1990a) Hepatoprotective activity of andrographolide from Andrographis
   paniculata against carbon tetrachloride. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 92B, 276–283.
Handa, S.S., Sharma, A. (1990b) Hepatoprotective activity of andrographolide against
   galactosamine and paracetamol intoxication in rats. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 92B,
   284–292.
Huo, T., Jinzhi, T. (1989) Study on antiplatelet aggregation effect of Andrographis paniculata.
   Chinese Journal of Integrated Traditional and Western Medicine, 9, 540–542.
Madav, S., Tandon, S.K., Lal, J., Tripathi, H.C. (1996) Anti-inﬂammatory activity of
   andrographolide. Fitoterapia, 67, 452–458.
Madav, S., Tripathi, H.C., Tandan, S.K., Dinesh Kumar, Lal, J. (1998) Antiallergic activity of
   andrographolide. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 60, 176–178.
Madav, S., Tripathi, H.C., Tandon, S.K., Mishra, S.K. (1995) Analgesic, antipyretic and antiul-
   cerogenic effects of andrographolide. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 57, 121–125.
Matsuda, T., Kuroyanangi, M., Sugiyama, S., Umehara, K., Ueno, A., Nishi, K. (1994) Cell
   differentiation-inducing diterpenes from Andrographis paniculata. Chemical and Pharmaceutical
   Bulletin, 42, 1216–1225.
Melchior, J., Palm, S., Wikman, G. (1996) Controlled clinical study of standardised Andrographis
   paniculata extract in common cold: a pilot trial. Phytomedicine, 3, 314–318.
Otake, T., Mori, H., Morimoto, M., Ueba, N., Sutardjo, S., Kusumoto, I.T., Haitori, M.,
   Namba, T. (1995) Screening of Indonesian plant extracts for anti-human immunodeﬁciency
   virus type I (HIV-1) activity. Phytotherapy Research, 9, 6–10.
Puri, A., Saxena, R., Saxena, R.P., Saxena, K.C., Srivastava, V. (1993) Immunostimulant agent
   from Andrographis paniculata. Journal of Natural Products, 56, 995–999.
Premila, M.S. (1995) Emerging frontier in the era of hepatoprotective herbal drugs. Indian
   Journal of Natural Products, 11, 7.
Ramesh Chander, Srivatava, V., Tandon, J.S., Kapoor, N.K. (1995) Antihepatotoxic activity of
   diterpenes of Andrographis paniculata (Kal-Megh) against Plasmodium berghei-induced hepatic
   damage in Mastomys natalensis. International Journal of Pharmacognosy, 33, 135–138.
Sarma, R.B.P., Tripathi, S.N. (1992) Effect of Kalamegh and amalkali compounds on viral
   hepatitis (Koshtha-Shakhashrita Kamala). Aryavaidyan, 5, 164–169.
Saxena, K.C. (1992) Immunomodulators from plants and their use in prophylaxis and
   therapy. Proceedings 25th Indian Pharmacological Society Conference, Muzzafarpur, 5–8, Decem-
   ber, 1992.
Shukla, B., Visen, P.K.S., Patnaik, G.K., Dhawan, B.N. (1992) Choleretic effect of
   andrographolide in rats and guinea pigs. Planta Medica, 58, 146–149.
Sutarjadi, Santosa, M.H., Bendryman, Dyatmiko, W. (1991) Immunomodulatory activity of
   Piper betle, Zingiber aromatica, Andrographis paniculata, Allium sativum and Oldenlandia corymbosa
   grown in Indonesia. Planta Medica, 57 (supplement 2), p. A 136.
Tajuddin, Shahid, A., Tariq, M. (1983) Anti-inﬂammatory activity of Andrographis paniculata
   Nees (Chirayata). Nagarjun, 27, 13–14.
Tomar, G.S., Tiwari, S.K., Chaturvedi, G.N. (1982) Kalmegh (Andrographis paniculata) and its
   medicinal status. Nagarjun, 26, 76–78.
Tripathi, G.S., Tripathi, Y.B. (1991) Chloretic action of andrographolide obtained from
   Andrographis paniculata in rats. Phytotherapy Research, 5, 176–178.
Visen, P.K.S., Saraswat, B., Patnaik, G.K., Srimal, R.C., Dhawan, B.N. Curative effect of some
   hepatoprotective constituents isolated from plants against galactosamine toxicity: In vitro
   study on primary cultured rat hepatocytes. Proceedings of 25th Indian Pharmacological Society
   Conference, Muzaffarpur, 5–8 December, 1992.
Visen, P.K.S., Shukla, B., Patnaik, G.K., Dhawan, B.N. Evaluation of hepatoprotective activity
   of andrographolide isolated from the plant Andrographis paniculata. Proceedings of 24th Indian
   Pharmacological Society Conference, Ahmedabad, 29–31 December 1991.
Visen, P.K.S., Shukla, B., Patnaik, G.K., Dhawan, B.N. (1993) Andrographolide protects rat
   hepatocytes against paracetamol-induced damage. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 40, 131–136.
156 Kalmegh
Vishwanathan, S., Kulanthalvel, P., Nazimuddeen, S.K., Gopal Krishnan, V.T., Kameswaran,
  C. (1981) The effect of apigenin-7, 4’di-O-methyl ether of a ﬂavone from Andrographis
  paniculata on experimentally induced ulcers. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 43, 159.
Wang, D.W., Zhao, H. (1994) Prevention of atherosclerotic arterial stenosis and restenosis
  after angioplasty with Andropgraphis paniculata Nees and ﬁsh oil. Chinese Medical Journal,
  107, 464– 470.
Zhang, C.V., Tan, B.K.H. (1997) Mechanism of cardiovascular activity of Andrographis paniculata
  in the anaesthetised rat. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 56, 97–101.
Zhao, H.Y., Fang, W.Y. (1991) Combined traditional Chinese and western medicine,
  Antithrombotic effects of Andrographis paniculata Nees in preventing myocardial infarction.
  Chinese Medical Journal, 104, 770–775.
                                                                       Kawanch 157

28 Kawanch




    Mucuna pruriens (L.) DC
    Syn: M. pruiens Bakr.
    M. prurita Hook.
    Family: Leguminosae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

In India the plant’s range is from the Himalayan foothills to sub-tropical forests.
It is a liana with trifoliate leaves, which may be up to 12 cm long (Fig. 20A). The
inﬂorescence (is) raceme with purple ﬂowers and silky rachis. Pods vary in size
and may be up to 7 cm long and 1 cm broad, curved at one end and covered with
pale brown to steel grey bristles. These bristles cause intense irritation if touched.
During seed collection great care is taken to avoid the pod touching the body.
Some collectors burn the outer bristles to separate the seed from the pods, while
others pluck the pods using a pair of tongs, store the pod in a thick bag, and
separate the seed by beating the bag with a club. The seeds are picked by hand
using a glove. Four distinct types of seed – variegated brown (big) (Fig. 20B),
white (big) (Fig. 20C) dark brown (intermediate size), black (small) (Fig. 20D) – are
available.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

As a component of the diet, the beans are soaked in water until they begin to
sprout. They are washed in pure water, boiled or ground to form a paste for
cooking.
   For medicinal purposes, the seeds are not used as such but are mitigated before use,
by boiling them in milk and removing the outer seed coat and embryo. The kernel
which is obtained is dried and powdered. The milk in which these seeds are boiled
is considered poisonous and is discarded. In south India (Shanavaskhan, 1997), seeds
are ﬁrst boiled in a solution of buffalo dung. On cooling, the seed coat and embryo
is removed and the resulting kernel is stored in rice gruel, water, yogurt milk or
lime juice for ten days. The seed kernels are washed after this treatment, with lime
juice and dried in sunlight for three days. The common uses of these mitigated seeds
are:
158 Kawanch




    Figure 20 Mucuna pruriens A twig, B big seed black, C big seed brown,
              × 3/4, D small seed black.



As a dietary supplement
These seeds are considered an aphrodisiac and a nervine tonic. A dietary supplement is
prepared by making small dough cakes of mitigated seeds and milk.

As an aphrodisiac
The seed is used in many aphrodisiac preparations. Some of these are:
                                                                         Kawanch 159
 1 Pulverize equal quantities of Chlorophytum arundinaceum, Tinospora starch, Mucuna,
   Hygrophila, Salmalia root, Emblica and sugar. The dose is 5 g, twice daily with
   milk, for three months.
 2 Take 4 kg Mucuna, 20 litres cow’s milk, 500 g ghee, 10 g each of nutmeg, mace,
   Piper chaba, clove, Indian thyme, Anacyclus pyrethrum, Argyreia, ginger, long pepper,
   black pepper, Mesua ferea, Cinnamomum spp. leaves, cinnamon, Elettaria, Callicarpa
   macrophylla, Scindapsus ofﬁcinalis and 8 kg sugar. Make a ﬁne powder of all the
   herbs and spices. Boil Mucuna seed in milk until it condenses to a solid mass.
   Roast this solid mass in ghee and add syrup prepared from 8 kg of sugar and mix
   all the herbs to it. Make candy balls of 20 g each from this mixture. Take one ball
   in the morning on an empty stomach and a second ball two hours after dinner. It
   is considered a supreme tonic.
      A similar recipe without herbs and spices is called Banar Gutika (Banar is
   monkey and gutika pill). It is said that monkeys in jungles consume these seeds
   and remain physically and sexually active all the time.
 3 Take 50 g of ﬁnely powdered Asparagus, Mucuna, Hygrophila, Withania, Sida spinosa,
   Abutilon root, 5 litres milk, 500 g ghee, with almonds, pistachios, pine nuts and
   dry grapes as per taste. Treat Mucuna seed with milk and ghee as above. Add the
   powdered herbs to the condensed milk and mix in the dry fruits. Make candy balls
   of 25–30 g each. Eat one ball at breakfast every day.
 4 Take 50 g of ﬁnely powdered Withania, Blepharis edulis, Mucuna, Argyreia, Tribulus,
   Hygrophila, Sida cordifolia seed, Abutilon and mix it with 250 g sugar. This mixture
   is for middle-aged people, who may take a dose of 10 g mixed in ghee, followed by
   milk, twice daily in the morning before breakfast and two hours after lunch.
 5 Pulverize 250 g Mucuna, 100 g Hygrophila, 350 g sugar and mix. The dose is one
   teaspoon, twice daily with milk.
 6 Pulverize 250 g each of Mucuna, Tribulus and Blepharis edulis and add 400 g sugar.
   The dose is as above.
 7 Pulverize 250 g each of Mucuna and Phaseolus mungo without their seed coats. Boil
   2–3 teaspoons of this powder in 200 ml milk until condensed, cool and take twice
   daily.
 8 Take 100 g each of Withania, Argyreia, Cyperus scariosus, Mucuna, Tribulus, Asparagus,
   Triphala, Mimusops elengi, poppy seed, 50 g of bamboo manna, nutmeg, cardamom
   and 500 g sugar. Make a ﬁne powder of all these items. Use one teaspoon twice daily.
 9 Pulverize Chlorophytum arundinaceum, Salmalia root, Mucuna, Tribulus, Emblica and
   starch from Abrus precatorius. Add the equivalent weight of sugar to that of the
   herbal powders. Dose: 15 g with 25 g ghee.
10 Pulverize 300 g Mucuna, 500 g Tribulus, 400 g Piper cubeba, 300 g Hygrophila, 200
   g Mesua ferrea, 200 g Chlorophytum, 200 g Salmalia root, 200 g Curculigo orchioides
   and 300 g sugar. Dose: 15 g with milk twice daily.
11 Pulverize equal quantities of Mucuna, mace, camphor, Argyreia, Calamus powders
   with sugar. Dose: 1 g with milk.

Aphrodisiac for women:
Boil 500 g each of Mucuna and Tribulus in 4 litres of milk until the milk condenses. Add
1 kg sugar and make candy balls of 15 g each. Dry and steep these balls in honey. Use
one ball per day for leucorrhoea, profuse menstruation and other gynaecological problems.
160 Kawanch
Antidote to Mucuna poisoning
If kawanch preparations show toxic symptoms, then a mixture of ghee, honey and sugar
is a good antidote.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

The consumption of improperly boiled seed increases body temperature and causes
skin eruptions due to L-dopa (L 3,4 dihydroxyphenylalanine). Repeated boiling is known
to reduce the L-dopa content and also that of anti-nutritional factors (Janardhanan and
Lakshmanan, 1985). Mahajani et al. (1996) observed that L-dopa obtained from the
seed or synthetic has the same activity. The major studies on the seed are:

In Parkinsonianism
L-dopa or the standardized seed extract can be used (Rajagopalan et al. 1978).
The patient should start with a daily dose of 250 mg to 1 g of L-dopa, in ﬁve divided
doses. If side effects occur then reduce the dose, otherwise increase it until intolerable.
Improvement may take six months. This treatment controls speech, rigidity and
helps swallowing of food. The therapeutic beneﬁts in this disease cannot be ascribed
to L-dopa alone. The residue of the seed left after the recovery of L-dopa is also
effective.

In anorexia nervosa
Patients with anorexia nervosa improved and gained weight by using the seed.

For haircare
By stimulating hormones, L-dopa helps in the treatment of hyperseborrhoic cases. In
patients with psoriasis, the results were excellent after four months’ treatment. L-dopa
helped in hair growth and development and may turn grey hair black. Hair pigmenta-
tion occurred in a white-bearded man after taking L-dopa for 8 months.

Effect on sexual behaviour
By acting on the hypothalamus, L-dopa may arouse sexual interest and cause excessive
sexual behaviour. Sambasiva Rao et al. (1982) put forth the view that L-dopa facili-
tated sexual behaviour by increasing brain catecholamine. Saksena and Dikshit (1987)
studied the effect of total alkaloids of the seed on spermatogenesis in rats. There was
a noteworthy increase in numbers of spermatozoa, weight of testes, seminal vesicles
and androgenic activity. Ahmad et al. (1991) noted that L-dopa had a stimulant effect
at low doses but a depressant effect at high doses.
   According to Elisabetsky et al. (1992) dopaminergic receptors are involved in male
sexual arousal, including the sexual arousal caused by L-dopa. It increased a feeling of
vigour, a sense of well-being and increased interest in oneself, family and surround-
ings. L-dopa stimulated the release of human growth hormones. In some cases, by
                                                                        Kawanch 161
administering levodopa, hypergrowth of the penis has also been observed. Sriniviasan
et al. (1994) studied the aphrodisiac activity of the seed on rats. The treatment showed
a signiﬁcant increase in mounting and intermission frequency. Anantha Kumar et al.
(1994) noted that seed powder, 75mg/kg body weight, increased the sexual activity of
male rats considerably. Amin et al. (1993, 1993a, 1996) found that the seed improved
sexual function, general mating behaviour, libido and potency in normal male rats. It
produced a striking and sustained activity in depressed libido and helped in premature
ejaculation. Uguru (1997) studied the effect of aqueous seed extract on the guinea pig
ileum to determine the drug’s mechanism of action. It was found to contain potent
histamine receptor stimulants, which led to an inﬂux of calcium and probably stimu-
lated muscarinic receptors.
   Ambekar and Khan (1991) tried a compound preparation of Orchis, Mucuna and
Alpinia for its effect on castrated male rats. The compound increased the weight of
sexual organs signiﬁcantly, indicating an anabolic activity.

Anti-ageing effects
Studies on ageing have shown that in mice given near toxic levels of L-dopa, life
expectancy increased considerably (personal communication).

Analgesic and anti-pyretic effects
Iauk et al. (1993) found that when L-dopa was administered to breast cancer patients,
it reduced prolactin concentration to half, with complete relief of metastatic pain.
Regression occurred on withdrawal of L-dopa.
   It cured migraines but, when the drug was withdrawn, migraines reappeared.

As an anti-depressant
Singh et al. (1990) clinically tried this drug on cases of depressive sickness for two
months. There was symptomatic improvement, with a decrease in the degree of anxi-
ety and depression.

For healing fractures
Yang (1985) tried L-dopa as a promoter of fracture healing. A dose of 250–500 mg,
thrice daily, was given orally for treatment of non-union, delayed union and fresh
fractures.

Substitute
The seeds of Mucuna utilis, which are bigger than M. pruriens, are also used for the
same purposes (Ghosh, 1982; Janardhanan and Lakshmanan, 1985).

Chemical studies
Seeds have about 5 per cent oil, 25.3 per cent protein and L-dopa. On boiling, L-dopa
gets reduced but other constituents – glutathione, lecithin, alkaloids, gallic acid,
seratonin – are heat stable.
162 Kawanch
Toxicological studies
It causes nausea, anorexia, vomiting and hypotensive palpitation. Involuntary move-
ments are very common, along with abnormal limb movements. The seeds should be
used with caution in glaucoma, cardiovascular, endocrine, hepatic, pulmonary, renal
diseases, and in psychiatric disturbances. Expectant and nursing mothers should not
use any preparations of these seed.

References
Ahmad, S., Taiyab, M., Amin, K.M.Y. Study of the activity of low and high doses of Tukhame-
   e-Konch (Mucuna pruriens) on CNS. Conference of Pharmacology and Symposium on Herbal
   Drugs, New Delhi, India, 15 March 1991.
Amin, K.M.Y., Khan, N.A., Rahman, S.Z. (1993) The sexual function improving effect of
   Tukhm-e-Konch (Mucuna pruriens) and its mechanism of action: An experimental study.
   Proceedings of 1st National Seminar on llumal Advia, Beenapara, India, 23–25 April 1993.
Amin, K.M.Y., Khan, N.A., Saleem, A.M. (1993a) The effect of Frah-E-Zilli, a herbal Unani
   drug, on male sexual function. Proceedings of National Seminar on History of Unani Medicine in
   India, New Delhi, India. 16–17 April 1993.
Amin, K.M.Y., Khan, M.N., Zilur-Rehman, S., Khan, N.A. (1996) Sexual function improving
   effect of Mucuna pruriens in sexually normal male rats. Fitoterapia, 67, 53–58.
Ambekar, M.S., Khan, N.A. (1991) Effect of a compound Unani drug on accessary reproduc-
   tive organs of male rats. Conference of Pharmacology and Symposium on Herbal Drugs, New
   Delhi, India, 15 March 1991.
Anantha Kumar, K.V., Srinivasan, K.K., Shanbag, T., Rao, S.G. (1994) Aphrodisiac activity of
   the seeds of Mucuna pruriens. Indian Drugs, 31, 321–327.
Elisabetsky, E., Figueiredo, W., Oliveria, G, (1992) Traditional Amazonian nerve tonics as
   antidepressant agents: Chaunochiton kappler: a case study. Journal of Herbs, Spices and Medicinal
   Plants, 1, 125–162.
Ghosh, G. (1982) A note on pharmacognostic and chemical identiﬁcation of Mucuna utilis seed,
   a substitute of Mucuna pruriens. Indian Drugs, 20, 24–25.
Iauk, I., Galati, E.M., Kirjavainen, S., Forestieri, A.M., Trovato, A., (1993) Analgesic and
   antipyretic effects of Mucuna pruriens. International Journal of Pharmacognosy, 31, 213–216.
Janardhanan, K., Lakshmanan, K.K. (1985) Studies on the pulse, Mucuna utilis: Chemical
   composition and antinutritional factors. Journal of Food Science and Technology, 22, 369–
   371.
Mahajani, S.S., Doshi, V.J., Parikh, K.M., Manyam, B. (1996) Bioavailability of L-Dopa from
   HP-200: a formulation of seed powder of Mucuna pruriens (Bak): a pharmacokinetics and
   pharmacodynamic study. Phytotherapy Research, 10, 245–256.
Rajagopalan, T.G., Antarkar, D.S., Purohit, A.V., Wadia, N.H. Treatment of Parkinson’s
   disease with the cowhage plant: Mucuna pruriens Bak. Symposium on Life and Health Science,
   Bharat Vidya Bhawan, New Delhi, India 1978.
Saksena, S., Dixit, V.K. (1987) Role of total alkaloids of Mucuna pruriens Baker in spermatogenesis
   in albino rats. Indian Journal of Natural Products, 3, 3–7.
Sambasivarao, K., Tripathi, H.C., Jawahar, Lal, Gupta, P.K. (1982) Inﬂuence of drugs on
   male sex behaviour and its pharmacological aspects: A mini review. Indian Drugs, 19, 133–
   139.
Shanavaskhan, A.E., Binu, S., Unnithan, M.D., Santhoshkumar, E.S. Pushpangandan, P. (1997)
   Detoxiﬁcation techniques of traditional physicians of Kerala, India on some toxic herbal
   drugs. Fitoterapia, 68, 69–74.
Singh, R.H., Nath, S.K., Behere, P.B. (1990) Depressive illness as a therapeutic evaluation
   with herbal drugs. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 11, 1–6.
                                                                                Kawanch 163
Srinivasan, K.K., Anant Kumar, K.V., Gurumadhava Rao, S. Aphrodisiac activity of the seeds
   of Mucuna pruriens (abstract). Proceedings of 46th Annual Indian Pharmaceutical Congress,
   Chandigarh, 28–30 December, 1994.
Uguru, M.O., Aguiyi, J.C., Gosa, A.A. (1997) Mechanism of action of the aqueous seed extract
   of Mucuna pruriens on the guinea pig ileum. Phytotherapy Research, 11, 328–329.
Yang, H. (1985) L-dopa extracted from seeds of Mucuna sempervirens Hemsl., as a promoter of
   fracture healing. Chinese Journal of Integrated Traditional and Western Medicine, 5, 398– 401.
164 Keshar

29 Keshar




    Crocus sativus L.
    Family: Iridiaceae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

English “saffron” is derived from Persian zafran. It is mainly cultivated in Spain,
France, Iran, Turkey and Italy. In India it is only grown in small areas near Srinagar in
Kashmir and in Kishtwar of the Jammu region. Most saffron in India is imported
from Europe, but that from Kashmir is considered the best.
   In Kashmir, saffron cultivation starts in the late summer with the transplanting of
the bulbs on the raised beds. The saffron ﬂower (Fig. 21A) is purple in colour and
blooms October–November. Three long styles (Fig. 21B), each with a distinct stigma,
are picked from ﬂowers by hand. Eighteen thousand ﬂowers yield 28 g of saffron. The
stigmas give the ﬁnest quality saffron which in Indian trade is called Shahi Zafran, the
styles give the second grade and the saffron is called Mongra Zafran. The third grade
is Laccha Zafran obtained from the remains of the ﬂowers by cudgelling and winnow-
ing them in water. By this process the petals ﬂoat on the water while the other
essential parts settle. This process is repeated three times to get Laccha Zafran. In the
western countries saffron is also sold in powder form but this is considered inferior.
   Saffron is the most expensive of all the spices. Commercial samples are thread-like,
consisting of orange-red strands, trumpet in shape, 1–2 cm long. It is highly aromatic
and bitter in taste. It is adulterated with the style, anther and corolla of saffron ﬂowers,
or with the ﬂoral parts of safﬂower (Carthamus) or marigold (Tagetes or Calendula), or
with vegetable parts coloured with coal tar dyes. The stigma may be soaked in glycerin,
sugar syrup or salt solution to give it a shine and to increase its weight. When a pinch
of a genuine sample is placed on the surface of warm water, the stigma expands immedi-
ately and the colour spreads out slowly, whereas with artiﬁcially coloured materials it
diffuses immediately (Madan et al. 1966). When dipped in ethanol, genuine saffron
exudes colour without getting discoloured itself, whereas when using adulterated saffron
the coloured materials are bleached after a while. The characteristic smell of saffron is
produced on drying when picrocin, the bitter constituent, splits, releasing the volatile
safranal.
   For use in medicine dried saffron is required. Saffron is dried by placing it on a metallic
plate. A metallic cup is heated and saffron from the plate is covered over with this hot
cup. When the cup gets cold, the saffron is removed and is stored in airtight bottles.
                                                                           Keshar 165




    Figure 21 Crocus sativus A herb, B stigma (diagrammatic).




USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

In Ayurveda, saffron is considered bitter and anodyne. It vitiates the three doshas
and helps diseases of the head. In the Greco-Arabic system (Unani medicine) saffron is
used for slimming, enlarged livers, urinary, bladder and kidney infections, menstrual
disorders, for strengthening the heart and cooling the brain. With ghee, it is said to
help diabetes.
   In traditional Chinese medicine it is used as an anodyne, sedative and emmenagogue
(Sugiura et al., 1995). It is said to make erogenous zones more sensitive and also has a
hormone-like effect, which may be due to carotenoids (crocin and crocetin) contained
in it. Other uses are:
166 Keshar
In gynaecological practices
1   In painful menstruation and for regulating menstrual ﬂow
    a A pellet of saffron kept in the uterus helps.
    b 250 mg saffron, triturated with half the amount of camphor, is prescribed
        three days before menstruation until the bleeding stops. Continue this treat-
        ment for six monthly periods.
2   In dysmenorrhoea, 4–5 pieces of saffron are given daily with goat’s milk.
3   For pain in the uterus during pregnancy, 4–5 pieces with 20 g butter and
    5 g sugar is given. The treatment is repeated every two hours until the pain
    subsides.

In paediatrics
For running noses of infants, give milk with one piece of saffron.

As a general tonic
Four to ﬁve stigmas of saffron are wrapped in a leaf of Piper betle. The leaf is then
chewed. This is done every day throughout the winter.

In impotence
The essential oil contained in saffron produces an aphrodisiac effect due to slight
stimulation of the central nervous system. In sexual debility, it is considered a sover-
eign remedy unsurpassed by the whole range of drugs in materia medica (Trivedi,
1997). It may be used as follows:

1. A mixture of 1 g saffron, 10 g mace and 10 g nutmeg is pulverized. Two grams
   of this mixture is taken daily for at least 60 days.
2. Boil 500 ml of milk with four dates, until the milk is reduced to half. Add 5–6
   pieces of saffron and sugar to taste. Chew this milk for half an hour before retiring
   to bed every evening.

As a nerve tonic
It has an anti-inﬂammatory effect. It is also used for melancholia and neuralgia and
rheumatic pains. For this, make a ﬁne powder of 10 g each of saffron, senna, colchicum
root and sugar. Take 125 mg of this mixture with water, twice daily.

Antidote to poisons
Used for both extraneous and internal toxins (Krishnamurthy, 1993).
                                                                                 Keshar 167
Ayurvedic preparation

Ksheer pak

Ingredients 20 g saffron, 2 litres milk, 10 g of ﬁnely powdered Orchis, Mucuna, nutmeg,
mace, Argyreia, long pepper, Anacyclus, processed iron and mica compounds, with 5 g
Makardhawaj (red sulphide of mercury).

Method Boil the saffron in milk, until the milk is concentrated into a semi-solid
mass. Mix the ﬁne powders of herbs and minerals in this concentrated milk and make
the whole mass homogenous. Sprinkle very ﬁne powdered Makardhawaj over this
ﬁnished product and mix thoroughly.

Dose Half teaspoonful twice daily for 60 days in winter.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Anti-cancerous activity
Nair et al. (1994) studied the effects of saffron on solid tumour growth in rats. Oral
administration of 100 mg/kg of the saffron extract inhibited Dalton’s lymphoma
ascites (DLA) and S-180 solid tumours by 87 per cent and 41 per cent respectively. A
dose of 150 mg delayed the onset of tumour formation and inhibited its further
growth. Saffron also caused an increase in vitamin A and carotene levels in the serum
of 180 tumour-bearing mice. The activity of saffron was due to crocin, which probably-
induced the anti-tumour effect by its provitamin A activity and/or by antioxi-
dant activity or by modulating the functional levels of the other antioxidants. Escribano
et al. (1996) also observed that crocin, safranal and picrocrocin inhibited the growth
of human cancer cells in vitro. Cells treated with crocin exhibited wide cytoplasmic
vacuole-like areas, reduced cytoplasm, cell shrinkage and pyknotic nuclei. Saffron
extract inhibited or prevented cancer and its pigments were used to treat papilloma,
hypertension, spinal cord injury, cerebral oedema, arthritis and aﬂatoxin-induced
hepatotoxic lesions (Dufresne et al. 1997). Konoshima et al. (1998) noted that crocin
and crocetin derivatives and 50 per cent ethanol extract of saffron signiﬁcantly inhi-
bited Epstein-Barr virus early antigen activation, and mouse skin papilloma.

In heart problems
Due to crocetin, saffron indirectly reduced cholesterol levels in the blood (Baker and
Negbi, 1983). Nishio (1987) noted that it showed a remarkable effect on blood coagu-
lation and platelet aggregation. It accelerated the in vitro ﬁbrinolysis activity of urikinase.

Immunomodulatory effect
Nair et al. (1991) observed that it had a modulatory effect on cisplatin-induced toxic-
ity in mice. The saffron extract prevented the decrease in body weight, haemoglobin
168 Keshar
levels and leucocyte counts caused by 2 mg/kg of cisplatin. Saffron prolonged the life-
span also.

Review
Rios (1996) has reviewed the literature on chemical composition and pharmacological
properties of saffron between 1925–1994. The active constituents have shown anti-
tumour, hypolipidaemic and tissue oxygenation enhancement properties.

Chemical studies
From saffron, 1.37 per cent essential oils, 13.45 per cent ﬁxed oil, crocin (a natural
carotenoid), picrocin and many other compounds have been reported. Genuine saffron has
the colour of crocin, the aroma of safranal and the ﬂavour of picrocrocin. The more
intense the colouring, the better the saffron is.

Toxicological studies
In large doses it can be toxic, narcotic and even lethal, causing violet haemorrhages.
Do not use saffron during pregnancy.

Substitute
In Italy, C. longiﬂorus also yields a saffron-like material. In this case the stigmas have
a high dyeing power but less odour and bitterness (Casoria et al. 1996).

Ayurvedic substitutes
Nagkesar is the commonest substitute, obtained from the stamens of Mesua ferrea,
Ochrocarpus longifolius, or Calophyllum inophyllum. Yellow nagkesar is obtained from buds
or stamens of Michelia champaca.
   The Ayurvedic scholars are also of the opinion that nutmeg has a saffron-like
physiological effect and can be used in its place.

References
Baker, D., Negbi, M. (1983) Uses of saffron. Economic Botany, 37, 228–236.
Casoria, P., Laneri, U., Novella, N. (1996) A preliminary note on an interesting species
  of Crocus (Crocus longiﬂorus, Iridaceae) similar to saffron (C. sativus). Economic Botany, 50,
  463– 464.
Dufresne, C., Cormier, F., Dorion, S. (1997) In vitro formation of crocetin glucosyl esters by
  Crocus sativus callus extract. Planta Medica, 63, 150–153.
Escribano, J. Alonso, G.L., Coca-Prados, M., Fernandex, J.A. (1996) Crocin, safranal and
  picrocrocin from saffron (Crocus sativus L.) inhibit the growth of human cancer cell in vitro.
  Cancer Letters, 100 (1/2), 23–30.
Konoshima, T., Takasaki, M.M., Tokuda, H., Morimoto, S., Tanaka, H., Kwata, E., Xuan,
  L.J., Saito, H., Sugiura, M., Molnar, J., Shoyama, Y. (1998) Crocin and crocetin derivatives
  inhibit skin tumour promotion in mice. Phytotherapy Research, 12, 400–404.
Krishnamurthy, K.H. Khas, Kesar, Nagkesar, Khaskhash. Books for All, Delhi, India 1993.
                                                                                    Keshar 169
Madan, C.L., Kapur, B.M., Gupta, U.S. (1966) Saffron. Economic Botany, 20, 377.
Nair, S.C., Salami, M.J., Panikkar, B., Panikkar, K.R. (1991) Modulatory effects of Crocus
  sativus and Nigella sativa extracts on cisplatin-induced toxicity in mice. Journal of Ethno-
  pharmacology, 31, 75–83.
Nair, S.C., Varghese, C.D., Panikkar, K.R., Kurumboor, S.K., Parathod, R.K. (1994) Effects
  of saffron on vitamin A levels and its antitumour activity on the growth of solid tumours
  in mice. International Journal of Pharmacognosy, 32, 105–114.
Nishio, T., Okugawa, H., Kato, A., Hashimoto, Y., Matsumoto, K., Fujioka, A. (1987) Effect
  of Crocus (Crocus sativus Linn, Iridaceae) on blood coagulation and ﬁbrinolysis. Shoyakugaku
  Zasshi (in Japanese), 41, 271–276.
Rios, J.L., Recio, M.C., Giner, R.M., Manez, S. (1996) An update of saffron and its active
  constituents. Phytotherapy Research, 10, 189–193.
Sugiura, M., Saito, H., Abe, K., Shoyma, Y. (1995) Ethanol extract of Crocus sativus L. antagonizes
  the inhibitory action of ethanol on hippocampl long term potentiation in vivo. Phytotherapy
  Research, 9, 100–104.
Trivedi, Madhuchandrika A best aphrodisiac, saffron. Nirogadham (in Hindi), October–
  December, 1997.
170 Kikar

30 Kikar




    Acacia nilotica (L.)Willd. ssp. indica (Benth.) Bre.
    Syn: A. arbica Willd.
    Family: Leguminosae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

The tree is common in arid zones of India. It can easily be identiﬁed by its dark
coloured bark, bipinnate leaves and its spines, about 2 cm long at the base of the
leaves (Fig. 22A). The inﬂorescence is yellow, globular and up to 2 cm in diameter.
Pods are 15 cm long with 8–12 seeds. The tree yields a translucent gum, yellow to
brown in colour, known as gum arabica, which resembles gum acacia obtained from
A. senegal Willd. (Fig. 22B) in its physical properties.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

Gum arabica is a well known household item in the northwest part of India and is
considered quite nutritive. It is mainly used after frying in ghee. The unripe pods are
also well esteemed. They may be used as dry powder or in the form of a thick
translucent sheet of dry juice extracted from the fresh pods.
   As per Ayurveda, all parts of the tree provide energy to the body. Kikar is dry,
heavy, astringent, cooling and helps in kapha and pitta. Gum is diuretic, astring-
ent and helps ulcers of the buccal cavity, dry coughs, dryness and inﬂammation
of the throat. Tender pods are astringent, used in various sexual deﬁciencies.
They are anti-leprotic, anthelmintic, blood puriﬁers, healers of wound and vaso-
constrictors. (All these properties may be due to tannins, which have an astringent
effect.) The uses of the tree, some of which are as per Saxena Parvar (1998), are as
follows:

As a general tonic
Fry the gum in ghee and dip it in the sugar syrup. Two to three teaspoons of this
mixture, when taken daily, makes the body strong and healthy. It is also good for
mental powers and virility. In another recipe, the legume Phaseolus mungo is soaked in
water over night to remove the seed coat. The resulting seed kernel is ground to form
a thick paste, which is then fried in ghee. When the paste turns brown, sugar syrup is
                                                                          Kikar 171




Figure 22 Acacia nilotica A twig, C pod, B A. senegal twig.


added and the whole mass is stirred until thick in consistency. To this mass, gum
arabica and dry fruits are added as per taste and availability, and when hot, the whole
mass is made into candy balls of 50–250 g each. The dose is as per the digestive
power of the individual.

For bronchial troubles
The gum soothes the throat through its mucilaginous action, and coagulates any blood
in the sputum.
172 Kikar
For urinogenital diseases
1   Slightly heat 25 g each of gum arabica, gum tragacanth, gum kino (Butea frondosa),
    gum mastagi roomi (Pistacia lentiscus) and make a ﬁne powder. One teaspoon of this
    powder with cold water may be taken twice daily for nocturnal emission.
2   When equal parts of dry leaves, bark, ﬂowers and the gum of this tree are powdered
    and administered, it increases the viscosity of spermatic ﬂuid and helps in other
    urinogenital diseases.
3   For venereal diseases, if pus and blood are passed through the urethra, make
    decoction of gum and tender leaves of acacia, sugar and black pepper. Drink 10 ml
    of this decoction, and douche the urethra with this solution.
4   For syphilis, steep 35 g of young tree buds in water for the night. In the morning
    macerate these buds by hand to form a thick infusion. Drink this infusion with 25
    g of warm ghee. Repeat this treatment for 2–3 days or more, but for a week after
    that do not add ghee and drink the infusion only.
5   For urinary troubles, in summer, particularly in arid zones, the urine may
    become scanty because of lack of water in the body and may cause burning
    sensation during urination. In this situation gum arabica mucilage is prescribed
    for drinking, and the patient is advised to eat three to four dry acacia pods every
    day.
6   For scanty urine in the summer, 5 g of a ﬁne powder made from equal quantities
    of dry, tender kikar and Tribulus fruit leaves is prescribed twice daily with milk.
    An infusion of tender pods may also be used.

For gynaecological problems
1   One dessertspoonful of ﬁnely powdered gum is fried in an equal quantity of
    ghee, and a cup of water and sugar are added as per taste, followed by a pinch of
    cardamom seed. This mixture is taken on an empty stomach in the morning. It is
    a tasty, nutritious preparation and, if consumed after menstruation, brings about
    contraction of uterus, vagina, and prevents leucorrhoea.
2   In leucorrhoea, a decoction of the bark with or with out alum is used for
    douching.
3   Two grams of equal quantities of powdered dry pod, gum and bark cures leucorrhoea
    and backache when given three times a day with milk or water.
4   A small piece of dry juice from the pods, if inserted in the vagina, acts as an anti-
    inﬂammatory agent. It also removes sluggishness of the muscles and brings about
    vaginal contractions.
5   Gum arabica fried in ghee, provides energy to both embryo and the mother when
    administered to an expectant mother.
6   A mixture of 3 g gum arabica with 3 g wheat ﬂour helps excessive bleeding
    during menstruation.

For anal and vaginal prolapse
Boil acacia bark in water until reduced to one-fourth. Soak muslin in this decoction
and insert it in the required place. The remaining decoction may be used for enema
and douching.
                                                                           Kikar 173
For diarrhoea and dysentery
Soak small quantity of leaves and gum of Acacia tree in water and ﬁlter them after
maceration. Prescribe two teaspoon of this ﬁltrate every two hours. Gum alone may
also be used. It provides nutrition to stomach and alimentary canal. The powder of
tender leaves also helps gastroenteritis.

As an anabolic agent
Take 200 g almond kernel, 50 g gum arabica and 250 g raw sugar. Soak almond
in water overnight, remove the seed coat in the morning, dry the kernel and make
a ﬁne powder. Fry gum arabica in a minimum quantity of ghee and make a ﬁne
powder. Mix the powders of almond, gum and sugar to the fried gum. Take 10 g
of this mixture for 2–3 months with milk, twice daily, before breakfast and after
dinner.

For eczema
Boil 25 g each of acacia and mango bark in 1 litre of water and foment the affected
part with water vapours, followed by an application of ghee.

As a rejuvenator
Five grams of dry juice, when given with milk, helps the sexual power of weak, old
and convalescent patients.

Ayurvedic preparations

Veerya shodhan churn

Method Pulverize equal quantities of tender pods, tender leaves and gum arabica and
mix them in an equal quantity of sugar.

Dose 10 g with milk, once or twice daily.

Use Spermatogenic, increases the quantity and improves the quality of semen. Helps
in all types of sexual inadequacy. Should be used for minimum of sixty days.

Rativallabh pak

Method Take 500 g gum arabica, 100 g ginger, 100 g each of long pepper (fruit
and root), 25 g clove, 25 g nutmeg, 25 g mace, 25 g Bombax malabaricum gum, 25 g
shilajit (a herbomineral compound of natural origin), 10 g black pepper, 10 g cinnamon,
10 g Cinnamomum spp. leaves, 10 g Mesua ferrea ﬂowers, 10 g cardamom seed, 10 g
each of processed coral, iron, mica and tin, 5 g saffron, 250 g ghee, 2 kg sugar and dry
fruits as per taste. Make a ﬁne powder of gum and fry it in ghee. Pulverize all other
herbs and spices but leave the saffron and minerals to be powdered separately.
174 Kikar
   Chop the dry fruits, almond, pistachio, dry dates, dry grapes and coconut, etc. Make
a very ﬁne powder of saffron and minerals and pass them through a sieve or muslin of
mesh size 200. Make a syrup of sugar. To this syrup, when hot, add all the powdered
herbs and spices, followed by saffron and minerals, and then dry fruits. Make candy
balls of 25 g each from this mixture.

Dose In winter take 25–50 g as per the digestive power of the person. It should be
chewed along with warm milk in the morning, when the stomach is empty.

Use A highly nutritious preparation, for the proper sexual life of both males and
females. It is of immense use after childbirth; it imparts beauty and health both to the
mother and the infant.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Both the bark and pod contain tannin and gallic acid, which help in the removal of
catarrhal matter from the bronchi, arrest bleeding, sooth the inﬂamed pharynx, ali-
mentary canal and urinogenital organs. Gum is useful in glycaemia and cholesterolaemia.
   The bark has a hypoglycaemic property. It signiﬁcantly reduced the blood glucose
concentration, by peripheral utilization of glucose (Singhal, 1984).

Toxicological studies
Gum acacia from A. senegal was found quite safe as a food item (Anderson, 1986).

References
Anderson D.M.W. (1986) Evidence for the safety of gum arabic (Acacia senegal. Willd) as a
   food additive: a brief review. Food Additives Contaminants, 3, 225–230.
Saxena Pravar, S.R. Herbal Treatment (in Hindi). Rajasthan Patrika Parkashan, Jaipur, India
   1998.
Singhal, P.C. (1984) Role of gum arabica and gum catechu in glycaemia and cholesterolemia.
   Current Science, 53, 91.
                                                                           Kuchla   175

31 Kuchla




    Strychnos nux vomica L.
    Family: Loganiaceae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

The tree grows wild in tropical and semi-evergreen forests of central India.
   It is a deciduous tree with short spines and thin, grey, smooth bark. Leaves are
7.5–15 cm long, 5–7.5 cm broad, elliptic (Fig. 23A), with numerous greenish
white ﬂowers. The fruit is globose, 2.5–7.5 cm and orange when ripe. The seed is
(Fig. 23B) discoid concave on one side, convex on the other, up to 2.5 cm in diameter
and covered with brown grey, silky hair, radiating from the centre. The seed is leathery
and very difﬁcult to powder.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

Mitigation of seed
The seed is very bitter and highly poisonous but some people get addicted to it and
tolerate the lethal dose. For use in Ayurvedic preparations, it is partially detoxiﬁed by
any of the following methods:

1   By boiling in equal quantities of milk and water, removing emerging cotyledons
    (said to be poisonous) when soft. The hot soft kernel turns hard on cooling, so
    these seed are boiled again until soft enough to pulverize.
2   Cow’s urine is used in place of water and the seed is allowed to remain in it for a
    number of days until soft enough for crushing.
3   The seed is put in clean clay soil and allowed to remain in it until soft.
4   The easiest method for powdering the seed is to heat it in ghee in an iron pan over
    a mild heat until the outer skin of the seed turns red brown. Remove the outer
    skin and powder the kernel.
5   The seed is turned into dust-like powder using iron ﬁles.
6   In south India (Shanvaskhan, 1997) seed are boiled with rice and water for three
    hours. When they are cooked, after removal of seed coat, they are chopped into
176 Kuchla




    Figure 23 Strychnos nux vomica A twig, B seed.


    small pieces and immersed in the juice of Chenopodium ambrosiodes for 3 hours and
    ﬁnally boiled in a decoction of Semecarpus anacardium seed.

  These mitigation treatments deplete the alkaloid concentration (Agrawal and Joshi,
1977), without changing their composition (Bhanu and Vasudevan, 1977).
  A dose of 30–60 mg of mitigated nux vomica is commonly given, sometimes it may
be increased to 125 mg, but it may stimulate the heart at this dose and may be lethal.
  The major uses of processed nux vomica are:

As an antidote to poisons
It is an antidote to lead poison, rabid dog bites, snakebites and opium overdose.

For wasting diseases
For wasting diseases in infants and children, mitigated nux vomica is given along with
powder of dry liver and kuchla oil.
                                                                             Kuchla   177
As a general stimulant
In Ayurveda, it is considered hot in effect and a stimulant for intellectuals and students,
etc. It stimulates the respiratory system, neuromuscular system and makes the heart
strong. It also helps lethargy of generative organs.

For the digestive system
For indigestion due to physiological weakness and for constipation, it is a drug of
choice. It is used in obesity, as it burns fat from the liver. Nux vomica helps cases of
acute gastric disturbance, when the patient’s stools are watery, the patient has acute
thirst, the stool is blood coloured (as in piles) or if the urge to pass stools and urine
persists but regular movement is not there. It strengthens the stomach and digestive
system by contractions of the alimentary canal.

For gynaecological problems
It relieves backache, delayed menstruation, dysmenorrhoea and leucorrhoea, when
accompanied by yellow, foetid vaginal discharge.

Contraindications
It should be given in the minimum dose to people who live in solitude and get angry
easily, and also to patients who have hyperacidity, acute ﬂatulence, urinary incontin-
ence, inﬂammation of the urethra, burning urination and nasal haemorrhages.

Toxicity
In the case of toxic symptoms, a leaf paste of Abrus precatorius along with gruel of
arrow root (Maranta arundinacea) powder is given.

Ayurvedic preparations

Kuchla oil

Method Heat 15 g nux vomica seed in 100 ml of sesame oil until seed turns brown,
ﬁlter and use the oil.

Use For external application in paralysis and wasting diseases of children. For
migraines, make a paste of this oil with equal quantities of cinnamon, or Piper longum
root, add cow’s urine and apply.

Navjovan rasa

Method Macerate 25 g processed nux vomica, 25 g processed iron, 5 g each of ras
sindur (red sulphide of mercury), black pepper, long pepper and ginger in ginger juice
and make pills of 60 mg each.
178 Kuchla
Use It is said to rejuvenate the body. It increases gastric juices so food is digested
properly and provides strength to the body, nervous system, and stomach. It helps gastric
problems, memory, chronic constipation, migraines or pain in any part of the body.

Laxmivillas ras

Method Take 75 g processed nux vomica, 75 g borax, 75 g black pepper, 50 g
processed iron, 25 g puriﬁed sulphur and 12 g puriﬁed mercury. Triturate mercury
and sulphur, add the powders of all other ingredients along with juice of ginger,
followed by the juices of Asparagus, Phyllanthus niruri and Eclipta to saturate the
mixture. Dry, repeat this process three times and make pills of 60 mg each.

Use As a rejuvenator it helps convalescence, wasting diseases, loss of vitality and
spermatic liquid. It is a spermatogenic, makes skin look young and healthy and cures
indigestion.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Strychnine stimulates respiratory and vasomotor centres. It has selective action on the
central nervous system (CNS), more particularly on bone marrow. Small doses produce
vasodilation. By its action on the cerebral cortex and peripheral nerves, it exhibits
marked hyperactivity. It remains in the alimentary tract for a long time and exerts its
inﬂuence on digestive system by gradual absorption.
   Furukawa et al. (1985) observed that strychnine has direct depressant effect on the
heart and inhibits the release of acetylcholine.
   Panda and Panda (1993) tested its anti-gastric and anti-ulcer activity and found its
effect equivalent to that of cimetidine.

Chemical studies
The seed has 1.8 to 2 per cent of total alkaloids, 42 per cent fatty oil and α-amyrin.
The seed ratio of strychnine to brucine varies from 2 : 1 to 1 : 1. It is said that during
germination or during treatments with aqueous ﬂuids (mitigation), strychnine disap-
pears whilst brucine, which occurs in the outer cells of the endosperm, is gradually
converted into strychnine.

Toxicological studies
Large doses of nux vomica cause tetanic convulsions and eventually death results. Even
with safe doses there may be some mental derangement.

References
Agrawal, V.K., Joshi, D. (1977) Effect of puriﬁcation (Shodhna) on the alkaloidal concentration
  of kuchla seeds (Strychnos nux-vomica Linn). Journal of Research in Indian Medicine Yoga and
  Homoeopathy, 12, 43– 45.
                                                                                  Kuchla    179
Bhanu, M.N., Vasudevan, T.N. (1989) Studies on sodhna of nux-vomica, Indian Drugs, 26,
  150–152.
Furukawa, Y., Saegusa, K., Chiba, S. (1985) Suppression of strychnine on the two chronotropic
  and inotropic effects in the isolated blood perfused canine atrium. Japanese Journal of Pharma-
  cology, 38, 439–441.
Panda, P.K., Panda, D.P. (1993) Anti-ulcer activity of nux vomica and its comparison with
  cimetidine in Shay rat. Indian Drugs, 30, 53–56.
Shanavaskhan, A.E., Binu, S., Unnithan, M.D., Santhoshkumar, E.S., Pushpagandan, P. (1997)
  Detoxiﬁcation techniques of traditional physicians of Kerala, India on some toxic herbal
  drugs. Fitoterapia, 68, 69–74.
180 Kulanjan

32 Kulanjan




      Alpinia galanga Willd.
      Family: Scitamineae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is a herb (Fig. 24A) growing in the tropical and sub-tropical areas of south and
east India. The rhizome (Fig. 24B), sometimes imported from the Java islands of
Indonesia, is reddish brown, cylindrical, about 3 cm in diameter and 4–8 cm long,
with raised rings and scars on the leaf bases. Its fracture is hard, taste pungent and
odour spicy. In India, it is known as kulanjan or khuljanjan or as a source of a contro-
versial herb rasna. In Europe it is known as greater galanga. A closely allied species
A. ofﬁcinarum Hance, imported from southeast China, is called lesser galangal (Wren,
1975) or galangol (Ratsch, 1997).


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

The Arabian physician Ibn Al-Baytar attributed a love promoting property to the
root. It has been used as an aphrodisiac and as an additive to stimulating liquors since
the 8th century. In German folk medicine it is also considered a tonic for sexual
activities (Ratsch, 1997).
   It is an aromatic, stimulant, carminative and expectorant. It is mainly used for
bronchial troubles, where small pieces may be chewed, under the name Pan ki Jar. (It
means root of pan, Piper betle is a wrong identiﬁcation, galangal root has no relation
with P. betle.) Sometimes it is prescribed for impotence and nervous debility, probably
because of its vasodilator effect. In Ayurveda it is used in the treatment of various
inﬂammatory diseases, diabetes mellitus and obesity (Achuthan and Padikkala, 1995).


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Anti-microbial property
Janssen and Scheiffer (1985) showed that an essential oil from A. galanga has activity
against gram positive bacteria, yeast and some dermatophytes.
                                                                          Kulanjan 181




    Figure 24 Alpinia galanga A twig, B root (diagrammatic).



Anti-tumour activity
Itokawa et al. (1987) isolated anti-tumour principles from it against Sarcoma 180
ascites in mice. Zheng et al. (1993) found two potential anticarcinogens in essential
oils. These two isolated compounds exhibited carcinogen detoxiﬁcation. A new potential
chemopreventive agent was also detected.

Anti-ulcer activity
Al-Yahya (1990) observed gastric, anti-secretory, anti-ulcer and cytoprotective proper-
ties in the ethanol extract of the root. The extract signiﬁcantly reduced the intensity of
gastric mucosal damage and decreased gastric secretion. It had cytoprotective effect
against sodium chloride-induced damage.
182 Kulanjan
Anabolic effects
Weight gain in A. galanga treated animals was signiﬁcantly higher compared with the
control. Haematological studies revealed a signiﬁcant rise in red blood cells and a
signiﬁcant drop in white blood cells. A signiﬁcant gain in the weight of sexual organs
and an increase in sperm motility and sperm count were observed (Quershi et al.
1992). Two groups of compounds, identiﬁed as gingerols and diarylhepatanoids, were
effective against prostaglandin biosynthesizing enzymes (Kiuchi et al. 1992).

Anti-hepatotoxic effect
The ethanol extract of this root reversed the cytological and biochemical changes
induced by cyclophosphamide in mice liver (Quershi et al. 1994). Jung et al. (1996)
isolated a compound galangin from it, which was effective in induced hepatotoxicity.

In atherosclerosis
Achuthan and Padikkala (1995) studied the ethanol extract for hypolipidaemic activity
and following the studies concluded that it might be useful in various lipid disorders
especially atherosclerosis.

Chemical studies
The root contains an essential oil, which has 48 per cent methyl cinnamate, 20–30 per
cent cineole, camphor and probably d-pinene (Nadkarni, 1976). A ﬂavonoid glangin
has also been reported (Jung et al. 1996).

Toxicological studies
Quershi et al. (1992) did not ﬁnd any spermatotoxic effects in the root.

Substitutes
Kaempferia galangal is known as galangal in Europe. It may be Kapur kachri of India
(Hedychium spicatum is also known by this name). It is an important ingredient of
Indonesian jamu preparations. These preparations have aphrodisiac, stimulating and
psychedelic properties (Ratsch, 1997).

References
Achuthan, C.R., Padikkala, J. (1995) Hypolipidemic effect of Alpinia galanga (Rasna) and
   Kaempferia galanga (Kachoor). Amala Research Bulletin, 15, 53–56.
Al Yahya, M.A., Rafatutlah, S., Mossa, J.S., Ageel, A.M., Al-Said, M.S., Tariq, M. (1990)
   Gastric, anti-secretory, anti-ulcer and cytoprotective properties of ethanolic extract of Alpinia
   galanga Wild in rats. Phytotherapy Research, 4, 112–114.
Itokawa, H., Morita, H., Sumitomo, T., Totsuka, N., Takeya, K. (1987) Antitumour principles
   from Alpinia galanga. Planta Medica, 53, 32–33.
Janssen, A.M., Scheiffer, J.J.C. (1985) Acetoxychavicol acetate, an antifungal component of
   Alpinia galanga. Planta Medica, 51, 507–511.
                                                                                  Kulanjan 183
Jung, B.D., Kim, C.H., Kim, J.H., Heo, M.Y. (1996) Protective effect of galangin on carbon
  tetrachloride-induced hepatotoxicity. Yakhak Hoeji, 40, 320–325.
Kiuchi, F., Iwakami, S., Shibuya, M., Hanaoka, F., Sankawa, U. (1992) Inhibition of
  prostaglandin and leukotriene biosysnthesis by gingerols and diarylheptaniods. Chemical and
  Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 40, 387–391.
Nadkarni, A.K. Indian Materia Medica. Vol. I, Popular Prakshan, Bombay, India 1956.
Quershi, S., Shah, A.H., Ageel, A.M. (1992) Toxicity studies on Alpinia galanga and Curcuma
  longa. Planta Medica, 58, 124–127.
Quershi, S., Shah, A.H., Ahmed, M.M., Rafatullah, S., Bibi, F., Al-Bekairi, A.M. (1994)
  Effect of Alpinia galanga treatment on cytological and biochemical changes induced
  by cyclophosphamide in mice. International Journal of Pharmacognosy, 32, 171–177.
Ratsch, Christian Plants of Love. The History of Aphrodisiacs and a Guide to their Identiﬁcation and
  Use. Ten Speed Press, Berkeley CA, USA 1997.
Wren, R.C. Potter’s New Cyclopaedia of Botanical Drugs and Preparations. C.W. Daniel, Essex,
  England 1975.
Zheng, G.Q., Kenney, P.M., Lam, L.K.T. (1993) Potential anticarcinogenic natural products
  isolated from lemongrass oil and galanga root oil. Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry,
  41, 153–156.
184 Kutaki

33 Kutaki




    Picrorhiza kurrooa
    Syn. P. kurrooa Royle ex Benth.
    P. scrophulariaeﬂora
    Family: Scrophulariaceae

In Indian literature, the name of this herb is commonly given as Picrorhiza kurroa
Royle ex Benth. so in the present book this name has been used in place of the valid
one, given above.


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

P. kurrooa grows in the alpine Himalayas of North India, and P. scrophulariaeﬂora in
the Eastern Himalayas and Tibet, at an altitude of 3,000–5,000 m. However these
species are getting increasingly scarce by the day. The local name of the herb in north
India is kaur, which means bitter. It is a small hairy herb, with rope-like rootstock, up
to 0.5 cm thick, covered with the basis of withered leaves (Fig. 25A,B). Leaves are 5–
10 cm long with a rounded tip and may be arranged in a rosette form. The ﬂowering
spike, with many ﬂowers, is longer than the leaves.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

In Ayurveda, kutaki is considered a nutritive in the sense that it increases the appetite
by stimulating gastric secretion. Because of its non-nauseating smell and taste, it is
an ingredient of many preparations used as liver tonics and appetizers. It is not an
astringent so it does not cause constipation. It helps in dyspepsia. It is a laxative in
small doses, but cathartic in larger ones. It is commonly prescribed against fevers ( pitta
jawar virodhi), particularly for those patients who have a high temperature, burning
sensation all over the body including the eyes, dry mouths with a frequent urge for
water, and red eruptions on the skin.
                                                                         Kutaki   185




    Figure 25 Picrorhiza kurrooa A twig, B root.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Both the whole root and Picroliv, as an isolated standardized preparation, containing
two iridoid glycosides (picroside I and kutkoside) have been studied.

Antihepatotoxic activity
Some of the earlier studies on this herb indicated hepatoprotective and chloretic act-
ivity against carbon tetrachloride-induced hepatic damage. Later studies demonstrated
186 Kutaki
that the various constituents of the root powder, its alcoholic extract, kutkin, picro-
side I and kutkoside had anti-inﬂammatory activity. Dass et al. (1976) conﬁrmed
that the bitter glucosides and its constituent, organic acids, cinnamic acid and vanillic
acid have a signiﬁcant chloretic and laxative effect. Hepatoprotective, chloretic and
immunostimulant activity was seen in the alcoholic extract of the herb by Ansari et al.
(1988). It stimulated both cell-mediated and humoral activity. Active principle kutkin
showed signiﬁcant activity in hepatic damage induced by galactosamine in rats and by
Plasmodium berghei in Mastomys. Singh et al. (1982) observed anti-viral activity in the
root against live vaccine virus, by the oral administration of P. kurrooa before and after
the rise in temperature. It induced non-speciﬁc resistance in animals and thus was
effective in viral hepatitis.
   Picroliv provided signiﬁcant protection to liver against carbon tetrachloride. The
degree of protection was similar before and after the treatment (Dwivedi et al. 1990).
Shukla et al. (1991) evaluated it for chloretic and anti-cholestatic activity. It showed
a potent effect with signiﬁcant reversal of enzymatic parameters. It also reversed
thioacetamide-induced cholestasis. A signiﬁcant reversal of these effects was achieved
by treatment in a dose-dependent manner. It was more active than a known hepato-
protective compound, silymarin (Shukla et al. 1992). Picroliv provided protection
against hepatitis B virus. It had oxygen-free radical scavenging property comparable
with that of α-tocopherol. Rastogi et al. (1991) reported that it reversed enzymatic
changes in liver toxicated with D-galactosomine or thioactamide. When studied for its
effect on mice chromosomes in bone marrow cells, it was devoid of clastigenic activity
(Jain and Sethi, 1992). Visen et al. (1994) studied the effect of Picroliv in combina-
tion with other bitters and hepatoprotectants, suh as andrographolide, obtained from
Andrographis paniculata. One of these combinations showed hepatoprotection in 90–
95 per cent of cases. Chander et al. (1994) administered Picroliv orally to Mastomys
natalensis infected with Plasmodium berghei. It provided signiﬁcant protection to
M. natalensis by helping against the depletion of glutathione levels in the liver and
brain. Srivastava et al. (1996) reported the effect of Picroliv on liver regeneration by
administering 6 mg/kg of it to rats before hepatectomy. It enhanced liver DNA,
RNA, protein and cholesterol levels compared with hepatectomized untreated rats.
In patients with mycobacterial infection, where rifampicin was used and Picroliv
administered along with it, the pharmacokinetics of the antibiotic were not modiﬁed
but patients were protected against liver damage (Dwivedi et al. 1996). It also pro-
tected against alcohol-induced chronic hepatotoxicity.

Immunostimulant activity
Picrorhiza kurroa is a potent immunostimulant, inducing both cell mediated and humoral
immunity, speciﬁc and non-speciﬁc (Singh et al. 1982). This characteristic is believed
to impart positive health and it maintains organic resistance against infection by re-
establishing body equilibrium and conditioning body tissues. It had a restorative,
rejuvenator, protective effect and saved organisms from extraneous substances, main-
taining homeostasis. Simons et al. (1989, 1990) found that this immunomodulating
effect was due to two anti-complementary polymeric fractions from the aqueous extract
of the root. These were dose dependent. Puri et al. (1992) studied the immunostimulant
activity of Picroliv, it enhanced the non-speciﬁc immunoresponse characterized by an
increase in macrophage migration index.
                                                                               Kutaki   187
In vitiligo
Bedi et al. (1989) observed that the herb potentiated photochemotherapy in vitiligo.

Anti-cancerous property
The effect of P. kurrooa on the functions of macrophages obtained from mice treated
with carcinogen ochratoxin A was investigated by Dhuley (1997). The chemotactic
activity of murine macrophages was signiﬁcantly decreased.

Anti-microbial property
The aqueous alcoholic extract displayed inhibitory action on virulent strains of Salmo-
nella typhi septicemia. When a traditional polyherbal preparation containing P. kurrooa
and the only roots of. P. kurrooa were studied, both had an inhibitory effect on S. typhi.
It protected in cases of both pre- and post-infection, in single and multiple dose
schedules (Sohni et al. 1995).

Hypolipidaemic activity
Khanna et al. (1994) found Picroliv was a hypolipidaemic agent, which acted through
lowering protein and lipid levels by inhibiting cholesterol biosynthesis in liver, by
bile acid excretion and by enhanced plasma lecithin.

Anti-ulcer activity
Biswas et al. (1992) found a kutaki effective in duodenitis, a pre-ulcerogenic condition,
in duodenal ulcer. Singh et al. (1993) reported anti-inﬂammatory activity in its fractions.
There was no effect on the spleen, thymus, adrenal gland or evidence of gastric
mucosal damage through the use of this herb. Bandyopadhyay and Bandyopadhyay
(1995) observed that it showed anti-ulcer activity by protecting gastric mucosa. It had
a cytoprotective effect and it lowered gastric volume.

Antioxidant activity
Chander et al. (1991) observed antioxidant activity in Picroliv. Rastogi (1995) studied
this activity in liver after partial hepatectomy.

Adulterants and substitutes
The common admixture is Gentiana kurroo (Family: Gentianaceae), but adulteration
with Helleborus niger, called khurasani kutaki (Khurasan is a town in central Asia) has
been recorded earlier. The root of khurasani kutaki is bigger, toxic and a high dose of
it may induce purging and vomiting, leading to death.

References
Ansari, R.A., Aswal, B.S., Chander, R., Dhawan, B.N., Garg, N.K., Kapoor, N.K., Kulshreshtha,
  D.K., Mehdi, H., Mehrotra, B.N., Patnaik, G.K., Sharma, S.K. (1988) Hepatoprotective
188 Kutaki
   activity of kutkin-the iridoid glycoside mixture of Picrorhiza kurrooa. Indian Journal of Medi-
   cal Research, April 1988, 401–404.
Bandyopadhyay, B., Bandyopadhyay, S.K. Evaluation of anti ulcer drug from an Indian origin
   plant Picrorhiza kurrooa (Katuki). International Conference on Current Progress in Medicinal and
   Aromatic Plant Research, Calcutta, India, 30 December 1994–1 January 1995.
Bedi, K.L., Zutschi, U., Chopra, C.L., Amla, V. (1989) Picrorrhiza kurrooa, an Ayurvedic herb
   may potentiate photochemotherapy in vitiligo. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 27, 347–352.
Biswas, T.K., Mukherjee, B., Maity, L.N., Marji, B. Duodenitis: Effect of Kutaki in comparison
   with famotidine. International Seminar-Traditional Medicine, Calcutta, 7–9 November, 1992.
Chander, R., Kapoor, N.K., Dhawan, B.N. Picroliv: a biological antioxidant. Proceedings 24th
   Indian Pharmacological Society Conference, Ahmedabad, India, 29–31 December 1991.
Chander, R., Kapoor, N.K., Dhawan, B.N. (1994) Picroliv affects gamma-glutamyl cycle in
   liver and brain of Mastomys natalensis infected with Plasmodium berghei. Indian Journal of
   Experimental Biology, 32, 324–327.
Dass, P.K., Tripathi, R.M., Agarwal, V.K., Sanyal, A.K. (1976) Pharmacology of kutkin and
   two organic acid constituents, cinnamic acid and vanillic acid. Indian Journal of Experimental
   Biology, 14, 456– 458.
Dhuley, J.N. (1997) Effect of some Indian herbs on macrophage functions in ochratoxin A
   treated mice. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 58, 15–20.
Dwivedi, A.K., Rastogi, R., Singh, S., Dhawan, B.N. (1996) Effect of Picroliv on the
   pharmacokinetics of rifampicin in rats. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 58, 28–31.
Dwivedi, Y., Rastogi, R., Ramesh Chander, Sharma, S.K., Kapoor, N.K., Garg, M.K., Dhawan,
   B.N. (1990) Hepatoprotactive activity of Picroliv against carbon tetrachloride-induced liver
   damage in rats. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 92B, 195–200.
Jain, A.K., Sethi, N. (1992) Effect of Picroliv, a hepatoprotective agent prepared from Picrorhiza
   kurrooa on mice chromosomes. Fitoterapia, 63, 255–257.
Khanna, A.K., Chander, R., Kapoor, N.K., Dhawan, B.N. (1994) Hypolipidaemic activity of
   Picroliv in albino rats. Phytotherapy Research, 8, 403–407.
Puri, A., Saxena, R.P., Sumati, Guru, P.Y., Kulshreshtha, D.K., Saxena, K.C., Dhawan, B.N.
   (1992) Immunostimulant activity of picroliv, the iridoid glycoside fraction of Picrorhiza
   kurrooa and its protective action against Leishmania donovani infection in hamsters. Planta
   Medica, 58, 528–532.
Rastogi, R., Dwivedi, Y., Garg, N.K., Dhawan, B.N. (1991) Perfusion of rat liver with
   picroliv reverse enzyme changes induced by D-galactosamine or thioacetamide. Proceedings
   24th Indian Pharmacological Society Conference, Ahmedabad, India, 29–31 December 1991.
Rastogi, R., Seema, S., Garg, N.K., Dhawan, B.N. (1995) Effect of Picroliv on antioxidant
   system in liver of rats, after partial hepatectomy. Phytotherapy Research, 9, 364–367.
Shukla, B., Visen, P.K.S., Patnaik, G.K., Dhawn, B.N. Prevention of carbon tetrachloride-
   induced hepatic damage by picroliv. Proceedings 24th Indian Pharmacological Society Conference,
   Ahmedabad, India, 29–31 December 1991.
Shukla, B., Visen, P.K.S., Patnaik, G.K., Dhawan, B.N. (1992) Reversal of thioacetamide-
   induced cholestasis by picroliv in rodents. Phytotherapy Research, 6, 53–55.
Simons, J.M., t’Hart, L.A., Labadie, R.P., van Dijk, H., de Silva, K.T.D. (1990) Modulation of
   human complement activation and the human neutrophil oxidative burst by different root
   extracts of Picrorhiza kurrooa. Phytotherapy Research, 4, 207–211.
Simons, J.M., t’Hart, L.A., van Dijk, H., Fischer, F.C., de Silva, K.T.D., Labadie, R.P. (1989)
   Immunomodulatatory compounds from Picrorhiza kurrooa: Isolation and characterisation
   of two anti-complementary polymeric fraction from an aqueous root extract. Journal of
   Ethnopharmacology, 26, 169–182.
Singh, G.B., Sarang Bani, Surjeet Singh, Khujuria, A., Sharma, M.L., Gupta, B.D., Banerjee,
   S.K. (1993) Antiinﬂammatory activity of iridoids kutkin, picroside-1 and kutkoside from
   Picrorhiza kurrooa. Phytotherapy Research, 7, 402–407.
                                                                                 Kutaki    189
Singh, N., Mishra, N., Singh, S.P., Kohli, R.P., Bhargava, K.P. (1982) Protective effect of
   Picrorhiza kurrooa against cutaneous vaccinial (viral) infection in Guinea pigs. Journal of
   Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 3, 162–171.
Sohni, Y.R., Padmaja Kaimal, Bhatt, R.M. (1995) Prophylactic therapy of Salmonella typhi
   septicemia in mice with traditionally prescribed crude drug formulation. Journal of
   Ethnopharmacology, 45, 141–147.
Srivastava, S., Srivastava, A.K., Patnaik, G.K., Dhawan, B.M. (1996) Effect of picroliv on liver
   regeneration in rats. Fitoterapia, 67, 252–256.
Visen, P.K.S., Saraswat, B., Patnaik, G.K., Dhawan, B.N. Hepatotprotective activity of com-
   bination of active material isolated from medicinal plants. Fourth International Congress of
   Ethnobiology, NBRI, Lucknow (India), 17–21 November 1994.
190 Kuth

34 Kuth




    Saussurea costus (Falc.) Lipsch.
    Syn. S. lappa (Decne) Sch.-Bip
    (Sometimes an old name Aplotaxis auriculata is used)
    Family: Compositae (Asteraceae)


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is cultivated in the alpine zone of the western Himalayas (Lahaul and Spiti, and
along the Indo-Tibetan border). Earlier it was collected from these areas and cultivated
in some parts of alpine Kashmir. In the last century, it was a precious commodity in
the Indo-Chinese trade and was one of the few medicinal plants which were cultivated
in Kashmir. Chinese merchants at that time would pay the equivalent weight of the
roots in silver, so at that time the kuth plantations in Khilanmarg (Kashmir) were
guarded day and night by security men to ensure the roots were not stolen. Recently
the trend has changed. This herb is now being cultivated on a large scale in China and
is being smuggled from China into India through the eastern Himalayas. In Chinese
medicine it is used under the name Saussureae Radix.
   The plant (Fig. 26A) may grow up to 2 m in length. The radical leaves have a long
stalk. The ﬂower head is sessile, hard, round and 3–5 cm in diameter, with dark
purple to black ﬂowers. The seeds are achene, about 3 mm long, curved and com-
pressed. The aromatic root (Fig. 26B) is horn-like, rough from outside, up to 10 cm
thick and may be 20 cm or more long, but in trade broken pieces are often available.
When cut, the root depicts a dark brown cylindrical centre.
   The Sanskrit name of the root is kushta, but the trade name kuth or bitter kuth,
is well known in the Indian subcontinent. Sometimes, because of the root’s close
resemblance with Inula racemosa, it is identiﬁed as pushkarmul, with which it is often
confused. A number of aromatic, tuberous, tapering roots obtained from various
species of Inula, Costus, Iris or of wild Withania are known as meetha kuth (meetha means
sweet) to differentiate them from the genuine herb, which is called bitter kuth.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

As per Ayurveda it is hot, aromatic, carminative, stimulant, diuretic and alterative.
The major uses of the root are:
                                                                              Kuth 191




    Figure 26 Saussurea lappa A twig, B root.


As a tonic
It has a good effect on the central nervous system. As a Rasayana ﬁne powder of the
herb with ghee and honey is licked twice daily. It keeps all infections away and imparts
longevity.

For bronchial problems
In asthma, ﬁne powder of the root, 3–4 times a day, is a prophylactic before an attack.
It does not have side effects like those of adrenaline or of anti-asthmatic cigarettes.
After prescribing for 10–15 days, the medication should be stopped to see the effects. If
required, the treatment may be repeated again. It has not got a cumulative or intolerance
effect. When smoked in small quantities, it reduces the swelling and clears a sore throat.
192 Kuth
As an anti-inﬂammatory agent
In arthritis, powder of kuth with castor oil is administered internally and applied
externally. As an anti-inﬂammatory agent, it gives relief from headache and other
body aches and pains. For external purposes, it is mixed with rose water and applied.

As a hair darkner
In China, hair is fumigated with the smoke from the root for darkening grey hair.

For healing ulcers
In skin diseases, root powder mixed in ointment is applied on ulcers.


THERAPEUTICAL INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Anti-microbial properties
Essential oils are strongly antiseptic and disinfectant, especially against Streptococcus
and Staphylococcus bacteria (Nadkarni, 1954). Chen et al. (1995) examined the anti-viral
activities of the crude extract. Two active constituents, costunolide and dehydrocostus
lactone, showed a strong suppressive effect on the component of the hepatitis B surface
antigen (HBsAg) in human hepatoma Hep3B cells.

Anti-inﬂammatory activity
It suppressed chemokines, which are involved in the migration of leucocytes from
circulation to accumulated inﬂamed sites, and thus has an important role in rheuma-
toid arthritis and psoriasis ( Jung et al. 1998).

As a cardio-stimulant
It relaxed involuntary muscles and acted as a cardiostimulant (Nadkarni, 1954). Dwivedi
et al. (1987, 1989) observed the root’s prostaglandin E2-like activity in the ischaemic
aorta. The crude powder reduced the frequency of angina.

As a bronchodilator
An alkaloid saussurine obtained from the root had a depressant effect on the vagus
nerves in the medulla, on bronchioles and on involuntary muscles, which relaxed the
respiratory tubules (Nadkarni, 1954).

Anti-tumour effect
The root resolved tumours (Nadkarni, 1954). Lee et al. (1995) observed that various
fractions of the root had inhibitory effects on IL-8 induction in lipopolysaccharide
                                                                              Kuth 193
activated rat macrophages. Taniguchi et al. (1995) isolated costunolide and dehydrocostus
lactone from the root, which acted as inhibitors of the killing function of cytotoxic T
lymphocytes. Cho et al. (1998) reported that the total methanolic extract (sesquiterpenes)
showed a potent inhibitory effect on the production of tumours.

Hypoglycaemic effect
Singh and Sharma (1990) reported anti-diabetic (diabetes mellitus) activity in the
root. Chaturvedi et al. (1993) studied the effect of alcoholic extract of the root on
glucose metabolism. It showed a signiﬁcant hypoglycaemic response by stimulating
the thyroid. Chaturvedi et al. (1995) compared this hypoglycaemic activity of the root
with that of Inula racemosa. Kuth extract increased concentrations of liver glycogen but
reduced that of plasma insulin (Upadhyay et al. 1996).
   Inulin contained in the root may be playing a part in anti-diabetic activity. Inulin
helps to stabilize blood glucose levels as it has a zero glycaemic index.

Aphrodisiac activity
Chopra et al. (1958) postulated that the essential oils contained in the root, when
excreted, produce a certain amount of irritation in the urethra, giving rise to penile
erection. Other studies showed that this activity might be due to alkaloid saussurine,
which has an adrenalin-like effect.

Anti-ulcer effect
Yamahara et al. (1985, 1990) observed that costunolide from acetone extract had
cholagogic, anti-ulcer and a gastrointestinal motility enhancing effect. Yoshikawa
et al. (1993) isolated an anti-ulcer principle, saussureamine A, which exhibited inhi-
bitory activity on stress-induced ulcer formation.
   A herbal preparation containing S. lappa had a protective effect on gastric and
duodenal ulcers induced by chemical and physical agents (Mitra et al. 1996).

Neuroleptic effect
A compound isolated from the benzene fraction had an effect similar to that of
chlorpromazine (Okugawa et al. 1996).

In gynaecological practice
Saussurea polysaccaharides had a stimulating effect on isolated rat uterus, which was
dose dependent (Lin and Wang, 1986).

In digestive problems
Inulin present in the root is a non-digestible food ingredient, an appetite suppressant.
It increases the faecal matter and improves the bacterial ecology in the colon. It
stimulates the growth and activity of one or a limited number of bacteria in the colon
(such as biﬁdobacteria) and cleanses the intestine by reducing the amount of harmful
194 Kuth
intestinal bacteria. It increases the biﬁdobacterial count 5–8 times and brings a signi-
ﬁcant reduction in Bacteriosides fusobacteria and Clostridia (Kleessen et al. 1997, Gibson
et al. 1995, Bouhnik et al. 1996).

Chemical studies
The root contains 2–5 per cent essential oils, 0.5 per cent alkaloid saussurine, 18 per
cent inulin, 6 per cent resin, potassium nitrate and valeric acid.

Toxicology
When smoked, it has an opium-like narcotic effect, but no toxic effect has been ob-
served in alcohol extract (Chaturvedi et al. 1993).

Adulterants and substitutes
The root is sometimes substituted by Echinops latifolia in Russia (Batorova et al. 1980).

References
Batorova, S.M., Rakshain, K.V., Bogdanov, T.V., Shantanova, L.N. (1980) Pharmacological
  evaluation of the decoction of roots of Echinops latifolia. Rastitelnye Resursy (in Russian), 16,
  134–136.
Bouhnik, Y., Flourie, B., Andrieux, C., Bissetti, N., Brief, F., Rambaud, J.C. (1996) Effects
  of biﬁdobacterium sp fermented milk ingested with or without inulin on colonic biﬁdobac-
  teria and enzymatic activities in healthy humans. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 50,
  269–273.
Chaturvedi, P., Shukla, S., Tripathi, P., Chaurasia, S, Singh, S.K., Tripathi, Y.B. (1995)
  Comparative study of Inula racemosa and Saussurea lappa on the glucose levels in albino
  rats. Ancient Science of Life, 15, 62–70.
Chaturvedi, P., Tripathi, P., Pandey, S., Singh, U., Tripathi, Y.B. (1993) Effect of Saussurea
  lappa alcoholic extract on different endocrine glands in relation to glucose metabolism in the
  rat. Phytotherapy Research, 7, 205–20.
Chen, H.C., Chou, C.K., Lee, S.D., Wang, J.C., Yeh, S.F. (1995) Active compounds from
  Saussurea lappa Clark that suppresses hepatitis B virus surface antigen gene expression in
  human hepatoma cells. Antiviral Research, 27, 99–109.
Cho, J.Y., Park, J., Yoo, E.S., Baik, K.U., Jee, H.J., Lee, J., Park, M.H. (1998) Inhibitory
  effect of sesquiterpene lactones from Saussurea lappa on tumour – production in murine
  macrophage like cells. Planta Medica, 64, 594–597.
Chopra, R.N., Chopra, I.C., Handa, K.L., Kapur, L.D. Chopra’s Indigenous Drugs of India. 2nd
  Edition. U.N. Dhur & Sons, Calcutta, India 1958.
Dwivedi, S., Chansuria, J.P.N., Somani, P.N., Udupa, K.N. (1987) Inﬂuence of certain indig-
  enous drugs on the prostaglandin E2 like activity in the ischaemic rabbit aorta. Indian
  Drugs, 24, 378–382.
Dwivedi, S., Somani, P.N., Udupa, K.N. (1989) Role of Inula racemosa and Saussurea lappa in
  management of angina pectoris. International Journal of Crude Drug Research, 27, 217–222.
Gibson, G.R., Beatty, E.R., Wang X., Cummings J.H. (1995) Selective stimulation of
  biﬁdbacteria in the human colon by oligofructose and inulin. Gastroenterology, 108, 975–982.
Jung, Jee, H., Ha, Joo Yong, Min, K.R., Shibata, F., Nagagawa, H., Kang, S.S., Chang, F.L.,
  Moo, Kim Y. (1998) Reynosin from Suasuurea lappa as inhibitor on CINC-1 induction in
  LPS stimulated NRK 52 E cells. Planta Medica, 64, 454– 455.
                                                                                     Kuth 195
Kleessen, B., Sykura, B., Zunft, H.J., Blaut, M. (1997) Effects of inulin and lactose on fecal
   microﬂora, microbial activity and bowel habit in elderly constipated persons. American Journal
   of Clinical Nutrition, 65, 1397–1402.
Lee, G.I., Ha, J.Y., Min, K.R., Nakagawa, H., Tsurufuji, S., Chang, I.M., Kim, Y.S. (1995)
   Inhibitory effects of oriental herbal medicines on IL-8 induction in lipopolysaccharides-
   activated rat macrophages. Planta Medica, 61, 26–30.
Lin, X.Z., Wang, G.X. (1986) The effects of Saussurea polysaccharides on isolated rat uteri.
   Acta Pharma Sinica, 21, 220–222.
Mitra, S.K., Gopumadhavan, S., Hemavathi, T.S., Murlidhar, T.S., Venkataranganna, M.V.
   (1996) Protective effect of UL-409, a herbal formulation against physical and chemical
   factor-induced gastric and duodenal ulcers in experimental animals. Journal of Ethno-
   pharmacology, 52, 168–169.
Nadkarni, K.M. Indian Materia Medica. Vol I Popular Book Depot, Bombay, India 1954.
Okugawa, H., Ueda, R., Matsumoto, K., Kawanishi, K., Kato, A. (1996) Effect of dehydrocostus
   lactones and costunolide from Saussurea root on the central nervous system in mice.
   Phytomedicine, 3, 147–153.
Singh, D.C., Sharma, B.P. (1990) Management of Madhumeha (diabetes mellitus) by indig-
   enous drugs Bijaysar and Kushtha. Aryavaidyan, 4, 21–23.
Taniguchi, M., Kataoka, T., Suzuki, H., Uramoto, M., Arao, K., Magae, J., Nishimura, T., Stake,
   N., Nagai, K. (1995) Costunolide and dehydrocostus lactone as inhibitors of killing function
   of cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Bioscience, Biotechnology and Biochemistry, 59, 2064–2067.
Upadhyay, O.P., Singh, R.H., Dutta, S.K. (1996) Studies on antidiabetic plants used in Indian
   folk-lore. Aryavaidyan, 9, 159–167.
Yamahara, J., Chisaka, T., Hunag, Q., Kishi, K, Kobayashi, H., Kawahara, Y. (1990) Gastroin-
   testinal motility enhancing effect of Saussureae Radix. Phytotherapy Research, 4, 160–161.
Yamahara, J., Kobayashi, M., Miki, K., Kozuka, M., Sawada, T., Fujimura, H. (1985) Cholagogic
   and antiulcer effect of Saussureae radix and its active components. Chemical and Pharmaceutical
   Bulletin, 33, 1285–1288.
Yoshikawa, M., Hatkeyama, S., Inoue, Y., Yamahara, J. (1993) Saussureamines A, B, C, D and
   E, new anti-ulcer principles from Chinese Saussureae Radix. Chemical and Pharmaceutical
   Bulletin, 41, 214–216.
196 Malakangani

35 Malakangani




    Celastrus paniculatus Willd.
    Family: Celastraceae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It grows as a deciduous climber in the warm hilly areas of Himalayas up to 1,000
metres, in hotter parts of south and east India, and the middle and south of Andamans
islands. The plant has white spots on young twigs. Leaves are 5–12 cm long in various
rounded shapes (Fig. 27A). The ﬂowers are greenish yellow and about 1 cm in dia-
meter. The seed are black (Fig. 27B), pepper-like but with a yellow to red cover. On
pressing between the ﬁngers, the seed coat gets separated from the kernel and on
further pressing changes into an oily mass.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

In Ayurveda, the seed is considered hot, dry and is either applied externally or admin-
istered internally, in the following forms:

1   When the seed alone is prescribed, the initial dose is one seed for the ﬁrst day,
    increased by one seed each day until a maximum dose of ﬁfty seeds is achieved.
2   Seeds are boiled in milk and used.
3   An oil is prepared by heating the seed in an inverted bottle. The pure oil which is
    obtained is pungent, scarlet or yellow in colour. Dose: 10–20 drops.
4   Krishna tailam or Black oil is prepared from a mixture of malakangni seed, benzoin,
    clove, nutmeg and mace. Dose: 10–30 drops
5   Triturate a mixture of 40 g each of Celastrus oil, honey and ghee for a few hours.
    The mixture is stored in a sealed container and is allowed to ferment for six
    months in a warm place. When ready, a dose of 125 mg is prescribed, three times
    daily for three months, as a brain tonic in winter.

   The above preparations are used as nervine tonic in gout, paralysis, rheumatism,
leprosy, in mental illness, to promote memory, to stimulate intellect and as an aphro-
disiac. The oil has a powerful stimulant action in paralysis. In the Siddha system of
medicine, the oil is given to build stamina. During the administration of this seed in
any form, a strict diet of just milk, roasted meat and bread is given.
                                                                      Malakangani 197




Figure 27 Celastrus paniculatus A twig, B seed.


  In the Philippines, it is prescribed as an antidote to opium poisoning. It is also being
used to reverse brain damage caused by organophosphate pesticides and similar toxins.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

As a tranquillizer
The oil acted as a tranquillizer in low doses. At a dose of 50–100mg/kg, the oil
produced a gradual fall in cardiac output, bradycardia and a marked increase in pulse
pressure in isolated heart and lung preparations (Gaitonde et al. 1957, Seth et al.
198 Malakangani
1963). It was found to be a central nervous system active agent (Dandiya and Chopra,
1970, Singh et al. 1974, Ahumada et al. 1991). Further tests suggested that it had
tranquillizing, anti-convulsant, muscle relaxant property, and anti-pyretic, analgesic
and anti-ulcerogenic effects, which shows it is a good adaptogen. It was effective in
psychiatric cases of depression and hysteria (Balaraman, 1971).
   An Ayurvedic drug containing this oil, when tested by Kakrani et al. (1985), re-
duced depletion of liver glycogen, inhibited glycogenolysis in the muscle ﬁbres of rats,
indicating the protective effect in stress. There was a signiﬁcant increase of the nar-
cosis time in both male and female mice. Another Ayurvedic preparation containing
malkangani was effective in residual schizophrenia (Tripathi and Singh 1994).

For enhancing memory
It hastened the learning process in rats, which was statistically signiﬁcant and the
results were comparable to that of vasopressin, a known agent for the learning process
(Karnath et al. 1980, 1994). Through its use the three monoamines, norepinephrine,
dopamine and serotonine and their metabolites, which are involved in the memory
and learning process, decreased signiﬁcantly in the brain. Nalini et al. (1995) found
signiﬁcant memory retention in rats treated with this drug.

In hemiplegia
Namboodiri et al. (1991) found an oil containing Celastrus to be effective in hemiplegia.

Hypolipidaemic effect
The 50 per cent alcohol extract of the seed showed hypolipidaemic and anti-arterosclerotic
effects in rats. It reduced both serum cholesterol and LDL and prevented atherogenesis.
It prevented the accumulation of cholesterol and triglycerides in liver and aorta,
regressed atheromatous plaques of ascending thoracic and abdominal aorta. Faecal
secretion of cholesterol was signiﬁcantly increased, suggesting that the modulation of
absorption was affected (Mathur et al. 1993).

Chemical studies
Two alkaloids, celastrine and paniculatine are reported.

Toxicological studies
At low doses, it is clinically safe, with low toxicity. Large doses cause burning of the
skin. An oil fraction produced a transient fall in fatty degeneration in the liver and
transient tubular damage in the kidney, but it was not found harmful in the long run.
(Bidwai et al. 1990).

References
Ahumada, F., Trincado, M.A., Arellano, J.A., Hancke, J. Wikman. G. (1991) Effect of certain
  adaptogenic plant extracts on drug-induced narcosis in female and male mice. Phytotherapy
  Research, 5, 29–31.
                                                                               Malakangani 199
Balaraman, S. (1971) Rapid screening of the behavioural effects of Celastrus paniculatus and
   sodium pentobarbital with ﬁxed internal schedules of reinforcement. Journal of Research in
   Indian Medicine, 8, 61–68.
Bidawi, P.P., Wangoo, D., Sharma, V. (1990) Effect of polar and semipolar compounds from
   the seeds of Celastrus paniculatus on the liver and kidney in rats. Fitoterapia, 61, 417–424.
Dandiya, P.C., Chopra, Y.M. (1970) Celastrus paniculatus Willd, CNS active drugs from plants
   indigenous to India. Indian Journal of Pharmacology, 2, 69–70.
Gaitonde, B.B., Raikar, B.P., Shroff, F.N., Pateljal, R. (1957) Pharmacological studies with
   Malkangani: an indigenous tranquilizer drug. Current Medical Practitioner, 1, 619–621.
Kakrani, H.K., Nair Vijaynathan, G., Kalyani, G.A., Satyanaryana, D. (1985) Studies on
   Ayurvedic drug. I Evaluation of antifatigue effect of the Ayurvedic drug Alert in rats.
   Fitoterapia, 65, 293–295.
Karnath, K.S., Haridas, K.K., Gunasundri, S., Guruswami, M.N. (1980) Effect of Celastrus
   paniculatus on learning process. Arogya – Journal of Health Science, 6, 137–139.
Karnath, K.S., Padma, T.K., Guruswami, M.N. Preliminary report of Celastrus paniculatus on
   memory process (abstract). Proceedings of the 46th Annual Congress of Indian Pharmaceutical
   Society, Chandigarh, 28–30 December 1994.
Mathur, N.T., Varma, M., Dixit, V.P. (1993) Hypolipidaemic and antiatherosclerotic effect of
   Celastrus paniculatus seed extract (50 percent EtOH) in cholesterol fed rabbits. Indian Drugs,
   30, 76–82.
Nalini, K., Karanth, K.S., Rao, A., Aroor, A.R. (1995) Effects of Celastrus paniculatus on
   passive avoidance performance and biogenic amine turnover in albino rats. Journal of
   Ethnopharmacology, 47, 101–108.
Namboodiri, P.K.N., Menon, T.V., Parbhakran, V.A., Vijayan, N.P., Pillai, N.G.K.
   Santhakumari, K. (1991) Comparative effect of J.J. tailam internal and external in Paksavadha
   (Hemiplegia). Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 12, 41–46.
Seth, U.K., Vaz, A., Daliwala, C.V. Billore, R.A. (1963) Behavioural and pharmacologic
   studies of tranquilising fraction from the oil of Celastrus paniculatus (Malkanagani oil). Archives
   International Pharmacodynamics, 144, 35–50.
Singh, N., Chand, N., Kohli, R.P. (1974) Pharmacological studies on Celastrus paniculatus
   (Malkanagani). Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, 9, 1–8.
Tripathi, J.S., Singh, R.H. (1994) Clinical evaluation of Smrtisagar Ras in cases of residual
   schizophrenia. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 15, 8–16.
200 Mandukparni (Gotu Kola)

36 Mandukparni (Gotu Kola)




    Centella asiatica (L.) Urban
    Syn. Hydrocotyle asiatica L.
    Family: Umbelliferae

The herb is known as brahmi in the Indian subcontinent and gotu kola in the western world.


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is cosmopolitan in its natural distribution and grows along damp shady streams, in
ponds, particularly on the marshy land, along the river banks and in irrigated ﬁelds up
to 2,000 m high ((Bagchi and Puri, 1988) in India, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Indonesia,
Madagascar and South Africa. It is cultivated in east India, Kenya and Hawaii. The plant
is a herb, a ground creeper (Fig. 28A) having orbicular-reniform, crenate leaves, up to
7 cm in diameter (Fig. 28B), which can be easily identiﬁed by epidermal peel in its
dry form (Fig. 28C, D); 3–6 ﬂowers are arranged in an umbel. The seeds are compressed.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

Mandukparni is considered cool, bitter, a brain tonic and a Rasayana. The major uses of
this herb are:

As a Rasayana
An old proverb says that Two leaves a day will keep old age away.
   In Rasayana chikitsa (rejuvenation treatment) the juice of the herb or a polyherbal
preparation called Brahmi ghrit is prescribed for kayakalp (complete overhaul of body
systems). It may be used during daily routines but kuti praveshika (conﬁnement to an
isolated hut for treatment) is said to give better results.

As a brain tonic
It is one of three major Medhya Rasayana (tonics for brain) herbs and is said to sharpen
memory. In an earlier ethnobotanical study by a European, who lived in India in the
nineteenth century, it was mentioned that consuming a few leaves of Centella strengthened
and revitalized the mind to a remarkable degree, providing the body is exposed to sun.
                                                          Mandukparni (Gotu Kola) 201




Figure 28 Centella asiatica A herb, B a leaf, C, D epidermal peel (diagrammatic).



It prevented brain fog and nervous breakdown. In 1914 an American tutor (Miss Mary
E. Forbes) in a princely Himalayan state of Mandi, (now in Himachal Pradesh in
India) began eating a few tender leaves of Centella in salad. After a few months she
never knew what brain fatigue was! It gave relief in rheumatism, neuritis and nervous
breakdown. The villagers in Sri Lanka asserted that the elephants kept their youth and
strength for hundreds of years by regularly consuming this herb (Lucas, 1966).
   In Chinese medicine this herb is said to be a brain food and an elixir of long life. It has
ginseng-like rejuvenating and energizing effects on the brain cells and endocrine glands.

For nervous disorders
In nervous debility, 300–600 mg of powder is given thrice daily. A paste prepared
from powders of 5 parts Centella, 4 parts Saussurea and honey is prescribed in a dose of
200–350 mg, three times daily, during speech therapy in children, in insanity and in
hypochondriasis. If this mixture suppresses appetite, calamus is added as a carminative.
202 Mandukparni (Gotu Kola)
For sterility
When Centella was provided as a homoeopathic medicine, a special effect on female
generative organs was observed, indicating its use for sterility. For this purpose equal
quantities of this herb and Trichodesma indicum with half the quantity of sugar was
mixed. Three grams of this mixture was prescribed, twice daily with milk for 3 days,
after menstruation. It is not effective if the patients have obesity, leucorrhoea or
dysmenorrhoea (Ghosh, 1930).

For skin diseases
It is said to bring about kaya kalp – complete rejuvenation of body. It makes the
skin disease-free, lustrous and charming. The plant in the form of juice, pulp, dry
powder, ointment or water extract, is used for various skin diseases, such as chronic
and obstinate ulcers, eczema, psoriasis, sores, elephantiasis, leprosy, scrofula, etc. In
scrofula, the powder of the herb is dusted all over. In leprosy it gives symptom-
atic relief. In syphilis, when prescribed in the second and third stage, healing of
skin occurs. It is an ingredient of popular hair oil, along with Eclipta alba, Emblica
ofﬁcinalis and sesame oil. This oil is said to help hair growth and make it black and
healthy.

For leprosy
The European physician Dymock in the nineteenth century (Ghosh, 1930) remarked,
“The administration of this drug to lepers causes a sensation of warmth and pricking
in the skin at ﬁrst, especially of the hands and feet. This is followed by a few days of
a general sensation of warmth, sometimes almost intolerable. The capillary circula-
tion is accelerated and after about a week the appetite improves, the skin becomes
softer, throws off the thickened epidermis and recovers its transpiratory faculties.”

In gastroenteritis of infants
The juice of 2 to 4 leaves is prescribed and a paste of the leaves is applied on the naval
region.

For various types of fevers
Equal parts of fresh sacred basil leaves (Ocimum sanctum), black pepper and Centella are
ground to form a paste and on drying made into pills of 2 g each. These are prescribed
three times a day.

Ayurvedic preparations

Brahmi ghrit

Ingredients 1 litre of Centella asiatica juice (if the juice is not available a decoction of
herb is used), 500 g ghee and 30 g each of Acorus calamus, Saussurea lappa and Convolvulus
arvensis.
                                                      Mandukparni (Gotu Kola) 203
Method Make a paste by macerating the above powdered herbs in the juice of Centella,
mix it in ghee and warm to a slow to moderate heat, until all the water evaporates.

Dose 5–10 g with sugar followed by sweet, warm milk.

Use As a mental tonic, particularly useful for scholars and students, for mental and
physical fatigue, and in forgetfulness.

Saraswat ghrit

Ingredients 3 litres Centella juice, 750 g ghee and 50 g each of turmeric, jasmine
ﬂower, Saussurea lappa, Ipomaea turpethum, Terminalia chebula, and 25 g each of Embelia
ribes, salt, sugar and calamus.

Method Mix the powdered herbs with Centella juice, ghee, and heat slowly until all
the water evaporates, strain and preserve the fatty matter.

Dose 10–25 g depending on the digestion power. Use with milk.

Use This ghee makes a person intelligent and virile so it is used to increase sexual
power and memory. It is also considered useful in all types of skin diseases.

THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES
Bagchi and Puri (1988, 1989) reviewed the literature on various aspects of this herb’s
chemistry, pharmacology and toxicology. The salient features of these and the other
studies are as follows:

As a sedative
Singh et al. (1981) tried the herb with patients suffering from anxiety neurosis. A
six-week treatment not only provided signiﬁcant relief but a quantitative reduc-
tion in the anxiety levels, leading to improved mental functions, studied in terms
of mental fatigue and immediate memory span. Experimental studies on the psycho-
tropic effect in rats showed a signiﬁcant barbiturate hypnosis potentiation effect,
besides producing signiﬁcant alternations in the neurochemistry of the brain. The
histamine and catecholamine contents in the brains of the treated group increased
signiﬁcantly.
   Agrawal (1981) observed that the alcohol extract of the herb showed a varying
degree of sedation. It prolonged the hypnotic effect of sodium phenobarbitone in rats.
It decreased the acetylcholine and histamine content of the whole brain, while catecho-
lamine was increased. Its effect on the central nervous system resembled that of
chlorpromazine and reserpine. It also had an anti-amphetamine activity. It produced
hypothermia, reduced the motor activity and was a potential neuroleptic. Shukla
(1989) observed a barbiturate hypnosis potentiation effect in different fractions while
Sakina and Dandiya (1990) detected a depressant property in this herb.
204 Mandukparni (Gotu Kola)
   Kapoor (1986) found a polyherbal preparation containing Centella quite effective
in insomnia. Kuppurajan et al. (1992) noted that a mixture of Centella, liquorice,
Nardostachys in the ratio of 1:2:2 was more active in psychomotor performance, com-
pared with a well-known tranquillizer, diazapam, and a placebo. The drug was effective
in controlling somatic and psychic anxiety, preferably in old age. In another study
(Kuppurajan, 1995) Ksheerbala tailam (see bala) a mixture of herbs was suspended in
milk and oil emulsion, and dropped on the forehead to see its anxiolytic property. The
preparation was effective in enhancing perceptual discrimination and psychomotor
performance.

Effect on mentally retarded children
Appa Rao et al. (1973) observed that the herb increased the intelligent quotient and
changed the behaviour of mentally retarded children. There was an overall general
adjustment. With the administration of the herb, shy and withdrawn children or those
who were restless became expressive, communicative and cooperative. The herb also
increased concentration power and attention span. In further studies Appa Rao et al.
(1977) observed a signiﬁcant increase in the general mental ability of mentally re-
tarded children after 3–6 months of administering this herb. Sharma et al. (1985)
administered a powder of the herb for six to twelve months to educable, mentally
retarded children within the age range of 8–12 years. These children were followed
for one year. They showed signiﬁcant improvement, with good performance in school.
Nalini et al. (1992) studied the effect of aqueous extract of the herb on learning,
memory and also on levels of norepinephrine (NE), dopamine (DA), 5-HT and their
metabolites in the brain. By using this concentration all of these decreased signiﬁc-
antly, which showed that all these compounds are involved in learning and memory.
Anbuganapathi (1995) studied the effect of the syrup prepared from Centella and
Bacopa on the learning ability of albino mice and school children and found it quite
effective.

Immunopotentiating effect
When a powder of the herb (3 g/day) was given for three months to patients, it
increased memory, sleep and appetite. It relieved anxiety and mental fatigue (personal
communication). Plohmann et al. (1994) found an immunomodulatery effect in the
triterpenoid saponins of Centella. Praveen Kumar (1996) noted that the oral adminis-
tration of Brahma Rasayana, containing Centella, signiﬁcantly increased white blood
cell count, bone marrow cellularity, natural killer cells and antibody dependent cel-
lular activity in mice exposed to gamma radiation. It reduced radiation-induced
peroxidation in the liver.

Anabolic effect
When albino rats were fed on a low protein diet and Centella, it prevented mortality
due to gross protein deﬁciency. It increased the blood protein nitrogen and pre-
vented fatty acid inﬁltration of liver. The increase in haemoglobin content was quite
high and statistically signiﬁcant. It decreased the mean level of blood urea (personal
communication).
                                                        Mandukparni (Gotu Kola) 205
Anti-cancer studies
Babbu and Padikkala (1993) found that a partial puriﬁed fraction of methanol extract
of the herb inhibited the growth of tumour cells with no toxic effect against
lymphocytes. Babu and Padikkala (1994) studied C. asiatica-induced apoptosis in
Ehrlich Ascites tumour cells. Babu and Padikkala (1995) also studied the role of the
extract of this herb on chemotherapeutic drug-induced toxicity. There was a reduction
in myelosuppression. Babu et al. (1995) observed that the extract destroyed 100 per
cent tumour of the cells in normal human lymphocytes. In follow-up action in animals,
it doubled the lifespan of cancerous mice without any toxicity.

Anti-inﬂammatory effect
Jain et al. (1994) observed an anti-inﬂammatory activity in a polyherbal Ayurvedic
preparation Brahmi rasyana, which contains Centella as well as other herbs.

For ulcers
Centella has been studied for its activity in connective tissue metabolism and endothelial
integrity in various ulcers and venous hypertension. Shin et al. (1982) noted that the
herb, in 93 per cent cases of duodenal and gastric ulcers, exhibited deﬁnite improve-
ment. Grimaldi et al. (1990) also tested it on venous ulcers. Chatterjee et al. (1992)
showed that extract of the herb signiﬁcantly inhibited gastric ulcerations-induced by
cold stress in rats. It increased GABA levels, which were dose dependent. Sarma et al.
(1995) tried an ethanol extract of T. cordifolia and Centella at dose of 100 mg/kg daily.
These had marked protective action against stress-induced ulceration due to the
adaptogenic property of the mixture.

Effect on skin
Bonte et al. (1994, 1995) tested the effects of various compounds from Centella on
collagens. It was seen that both asiaticoside and madecosside stimulated collagen
secretion. Sunil Kumar et al. (1998) applied topically various formulations containing
aqueous extract of Centella to open wounds. It increased cellular proliferation and
collagen synthesis at the wound site. Treated wounds epithelized faster and the rate of
wound contraction was higher, compared to the control.

Anti-ﬁlarial effect
A mixture of ethanol extract of C. asiatica and Acacia auriculiformis was administered to
dogs naturally infected with Diroﬁlaria immitis by Sarkar et al. (1998). It resulted in a
considerable decrease in ﬁlarial count.

Chemical studies
Three principle compounds reported from the herb are asiatic acid, madecassic acid
and asiaticoside. In the body asiaticoside gets transformed into asiatic acid, which is
the most active (Grimaldi et al. 1990). Two saponins are brahmoside and brahminoside
206 Mandukparni (Gotu Kola)




    Figure 29 Hydrocotyle javanica, A herb, B dry herb.



and the two triterpenic acids are brahmic acid and isobrahmic acid (Thakur et al.
1989). It also contains essential oil.

Toxicological studies
In high doses it is a narcotic, causing heaviness of the head, headaches and vasodilation,
which may lead to coma. Studies on the compound asiaticoside showed that it is not
very toxic. At higher concentrations it affected the epidermis by keratinization. The
herb caused 20 per cent mortality at a dose of 10 g/kg (Agrawal, 1981). Centella may
cause contact dermatitis on external application (Danese et al. 1994).

Adulterants and substitutes
The Chinese herb Fo-Ti tieng, which means elixir for long life, is obtained from a closely
allied plant, Hydrocotyle asiatica minor, and is sometimes supplied as gotu kola.
A variety of Centella known as thankuni grows in east India. It is smaller than
C. asiatica of Indo-gangetic plains and is less bitter. It is cooked and eaten as spinach.
It is also sold as a genuine herb but is considered inferior.
                                                               Mandukparni (Gotu Kola) 207
Mandukparni is a herb with semi-lunar or orbicular leaves so other herbs or plants
with the same types of leaves are sometimes substituted for it. Some of the known
adulterants are: Merremia emerginata Hallier, Syn. Ipomoea reniform Choisy, Evolvulus
emarginatus Burm., Hydrocotyle javanica Thunb. (Figs. 29A & B) and H. rotundifolia
Roxb. (Bagchi and Puri, 1989). Recently a large-scale adulteration of the herb with
Malva rotundifolia has been observed.


References
Agrawal, S.S. (1981) Some CNS effects of Hydrocotyle asiatica Linn. Journal of Research in Ayurveda
   and Siddha, 2, 144–149.
Anbuganapathi, G. (1995) The synergistic effect of Vallarai and Brahmi on learning ability of
   albino mice and school children. International Seminar on Recent Trends in Pharmaceutiucal
   Sciences, Ootacamund. (TN, India) 18–20 Feb. 1995.
Appa Rao, M.V.R., Srinivasan, K., Koteswara Rao, T. (1973) The effect of mandookparni
   (Centella asiatica) on the general mental ability (medhya) of mentally retarded children.
   Journal for Research in Indian Medicine, 8, 9–16.
Appa Rao, M.V.R., Srinivasan, K., Koteswara Rao, T. (1977) The effect of Centella asiatica
   on the general mental ability of mentally retarded children. Indian Journal of Psychiatry, 19,
   54–59.
Babu, T.D., Kuttan, G., Padikkala, J. (1995) Cytotoxic and anti-tumour properties of certain
   taxa of Umbelliferae with special reference to Centella asiatica (L.) Urban. Journal of
   Ethnopharmacology, 48, 53–57.
Babu, T.D., Paddikkala, J. (1993) Anticancer activity of an active principle from Centella
   asiatica. Amala Research Bulletin, 13, 46– 49.
Babu, T.D., Padikkala, J. (1994) DNA frgamentation in Ehrlich Ascites tumour cells by
   extract of herbal plant Centella asiatica (L.). Amala Research Bulletin, 14, 52–56.
Babu, T.D., Padikkala, J. (1995) The role of Centella asiatica extracts on chemotherapeutic
   drug-induced toxicity in mice. Amala Research Bulletin, 15, 41– 45.
Bagchi, G.D., Puri, H.S. (1988) Centella asiatica I. Herba Hungarica, 27, 137–140.
Bagchi, G.D., Puri, H.S. (1989) Centella asiatica II. Herba Hungarica, 28, 127–134.
Bonte, F., Dumas, M., Chaudagne, C., Meybeck, A. (1994) Inﬂuence of asiatic acid, madecassic
   acid and asiaticoside on human collagen I synthesis. Planta Medica, 60, 133–135.
Bonte, F., Dumas, M., Chaudagne, C., Meybeck, A. (1995) Asiaticoside and madecassoside
   activity on human ﬁbroblast type I and II collagen secretion. Annales Pharmaceutiques Francaises,
   53, 38–42.
Chatterjee, T.K., Chakraborty, A., Pathak, M. (1992) Effect of plant extract Centella asiatica (Linn.)
   on cold restraint stress ulcer in rats. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 30, 889–891.
Danese, P., Carnevali, C., Bertazzoni, M.G. (1994) Allergic contact dermatitis due to Centella
   asiatica extract. Contact Dermatitis, 31, 201.
Ghosh, S.T. Drugs of Hindoostan. Hahneman Publishing Co, Calcutta, India 1930.
Grimaldi, R., De Ponti, F., D’Angelo, L., Caravaggi, M., Guidi, G., Lecchini, S., Frigo, G.M.,
   Crema, A. (1990) Pharmacokinetics of the total triterpenic fraction of Centella asiatica after
   single and multiple administration to healthy volunteers, a new assay for asiatic acid. Journal
   of Ethnopharmacology, 28, 235–241.
Jain, P., Khanna, N.K., Trehan, N. (1994) Antiinﬂammatory effects of an Ayurvedic prepara-
   tion Brahmi Rasayan in rodents. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 32, 633–636.
Kapoor, K.B. (1986) Study of Yogi Rasayan (Brami jam) in insomnia. Journal of Scientiﬁc
   Research on Plants and Medicine, 7, 50–53.
Kuppurajan, K. Anti-anxiety effect of an ayurvedic compound preparation. A cross over trial.
   Seminar on Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, CCRAS, New Delhi, 20–22 March 1995.
208 Mandukparni (Gotu Kola)
Kuppurajan, K., Seshadri, C., Rajagopalan, V., Srinivasan, K., Sitaraman, R., Indurthi, J.,
   Venkataraghavan, S. (1992) Anti-anxiety effect of an Ayurvedic compound drug – a cross
   over trial. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 13, 107–116.
Lucas, Richard Natures’s Medicine. Park Publishing, UK 1966.
Nalini, K., Aroor, A.R., Karanth, K.S., Rao, A. (1992) Effect of Centella asiatica fresh leaf
   aqueous extract on learning and memory and biogenic amine turnover in albino rats.
   Fitoterapia, 63, 232–237.
Plohmann, B., Bader, G., Streich, S., Hiller, K., Franz, G. (1994) Immno-modulatory effects of
   triterpenoid saponins. European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 21, 120.
Praveen Kumar, Kuttan, V.R., Kuttan, G. (1996) Radioprotective effects of Rasayanas. Indian
   Journal of Experimental Biology, 34, 848–850.
Sarkar, P., Sinha Babu, S.P., Sukul, N.C. (1998) Antiﬁlarial effect of a combination of botanicals
   from Acacia auriculiformis and Centella asiatica on canine diroﬁlariasis. Pharmaceutical Bio-
   logy, 36, 107–110.
Sakina, M.R., Dandiya, P.C. (1990) A psycho-neuropharmacological proﬁle of Centella asiatica
   extract. Fitoterapia, 61, 291–296.
Sarma, D.N.K., Khosa, R.L., Chansauria, J.P.N., Sahai, M. (1995) Antiulcer activity of Tinospora
   cordifolia Miers and Centella asiatica Linn extracts. Phytotherapy Research, 9, 589–590.
Sharma, R., Jaiswal, A.N., Suresh Kumar, Chaturvedi, C., Tewari, P.V. (1985) Role of Brahmi
   in educable mentally retarded children. Journal of Research in Education of Indian Medicine,
   1, 55–77.
Singh R.H., Shukla, S.P., Mishra, B.K. (1981) The psychotropic effect of Medhya rasayana
   drug, Mandukparni (Hydrocotyle asiatica): an experimental study. Part II. Journal of Research in
   Ayurveda and Siddha, 2, 1–10.
Shin, H.S., Chou, I.C., Lee, M.H., Pack, K.N. (1982) Clinical trials of medecassol: Centella
   asitica on gastro-intestinal ulcer patients. Korean Journal of Gastroenterology, 14, 49–56.
Shukla, S.P. (1989) A study on barbiturate hypnosis potentiation effects of different fraction of
   indigenous plant drug Mandukparni (Hydrocotyle asiatica Linn). Bulletin of Medico-Ethnobotanical
   Research, 10, 119–123.
Sunilkumar, Parameshwaraiah, S., Shivakumar, H.G. (1998) Evaluation of topical formulations
   of aqueous extract of Centella asiatica on open wounds in rats. Indian Journal of Experimental
   Biology, 36, 569–572.
Thakur, R.S., Puri, H.S., Akhtar Hussain Major Medicinal Plants of India. CIMAP, Lucknow,
   India 1989.
                                                                           Mundi 209

37 Mundi




    Sphaeranthus indicus L.
    S. africanus L.
    Family: Asteraceae (Compositae)


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

These plants are hygrophytic weeds, growing in winter in the warmer part of the
Indian subcontinent. The plant is aromatic, up to 30 cm long with spreading roots.
The leaves are herbaceous, serrate and 2–5 cm long. The inﬂorescence is pink to light
violet in colour and may be up to 2 cm long. The herb has a strong smell and, if
ingested, its excretion can be perceived by the unpleasant smell of urine and sweat.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

As per Ayurveda it is light, dry, bitter, sweet, hot, a blood puriﬁer, diuretic, and
sudoriﬁc.

For urinary inﬂammation
In syphilis, when there is acute pain passing urine and the urethra is inﬂamed, a
decoction of the herb is given orally, as well as injected into the urethra. Through this
treatment inﬂammation, swelling and pain subside and urine ﬂow becomes normal.
This treatment also helps these symptoms in women. It relieves various skin diseases
as well. It helps in polyurea, when used for 4–6 months.

For development of the breast
Make a paste of mundi and long pepper with oil, ﬁlter and use it as nasal drops and for
massaging on the breast.

For migraines
Heat the juice of mundi until warm and add black pepper powder to it. Use it before
meals for seven days.
210 Mundi
As a Rasayana
A powder prepared from the whole plant or from ﬂowers has a rejuvenating effect and
keeps old age away (Vaidya, 1998). It may be used as follows:

1. For physical strength and as a mental tonic, use the herb with ghee.
2. Root juice of the herb or tea improves youthful vigour, prevents premature greying
   of hair and wrinkles on the skin. The same effects are achieved when this herb is
   used with an equal quantity of Eclipta.
3. For a spermatogenic effect, the herb is given with sugar.

Ayurvedic preparations

Arq mundi (aqua mundi) I

Method Soak 1 kg ﬂowers in 8 litres of water and distil to obtain 5 litres of distillate
(Some people mix 1 kg of fresh rose petals to above, before distillation).

Dose 125 ml.

Use   Cepahalic tonic, cardiac stimulant and for improving eyesight.

Arq mundi (aqua mundi) II

Method Mix the juice of the ground root. When the mixture is dry add a few drops
of jasmine oil. Distil the whole mass and collect the distillate.

Dose Smear this distillate on betel leaf and chew it with betel nut.

Use   For rejuvenation.

Mundi resinoid

Method The whole herb is distilled and the resinoid, which ﬂoats on the top of the
distillate, is separated. The distillate obtained is used for further distillation of the
fresh herb and more resinoid is collected.

Dose One drop of the resinoid in a teaspoon of sugar for 40 days.

Use   Elixir for vigour and vitality and for rejuvenating the whole system.

Halwa mundi

Method Take equal quantities of wheat ﬂour, sugar, ghee and the dried, powdered
whole plant of mundi. Make a thick syrup of sugar. Roast wheat ﬂour in ghee, add the
sugar syrup followed by the herb. Mix thoroughly and let it cool.
                                                                                Mundi 211
Dose 30–50 g Halwa daily for 40 days.

Use Keeps the body young, energetic and provides enough strength for day-to-day
activities.

It is a preparation chosen by fugitives inhabiting forests in central India. It is said to
provide them enough strength and energy to remain in the ravines without food and
water for days.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Immunostimulant activity
This activity has been observed in sesquiterpene glycosides of the herb (Shekhani et al.
1990).

Anti-tumour property
An Ayurvedic preparation which contains Curculigo, Gymnema, Sphaeranthus, Vanda,
Glycyrrhiza, etc. protected rats against induced mammary tumours (Sharma et al. 1991).

Chemical studies
Alkaloid sphaeranthine, 0.02 per cent essential oil and sesquiterpene glycoside.

Substitute
Sphaeranthus amaranthoides grows in the rice ﬁelds of south India. This herb is bigger
than the two species mentioned above. In this case the leaves may be up to 10 cm long
and the inﬂorescence 1–2.5 cm long.

References
Sharma, H.M., Dwivedi, C., Dalter, B.C., Abou-Issa, H. (1991) Antineoplastic properties of
  Maharishi Amrit Kalash, an Ayurvedic food supplement against 7,12 dimethylbenz (a)
  anthracene-induced memory tumours in rats. Journal of Research and Education in Indian
  Medicine, 10, 1–8.
Shekhani, M.S., Pir Muzzam Shah, Afshan Yasmin, Rabia Siddiqui, Shahnaz Perveen, Khalid
  Mohammed Khan, Shana Urooj Kazmi, Atta-ur Rehman (1990) An immunostimulant
  sesquiterpene glycoside from Sphaeranthus indicus. Phytochemistry, 29, 2573–2576.
Vaidya, A.R. The Ancient Indian System of Rejuvenation and Longevity. Indian Book Center Delhi
  India 1998.
212 Musli

38 Musli




In Ayurveda two types of musli, black and white are recognized.


MUSLI BLACK

    Curculigo orchioides Gaertn.
    Family: Amaryllidaceae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

The plant grows as an under-shrub in the forests of south and east India. The herb has
3– 4 leaves, 15–50 cm long and 3–5 cm broad, emerging from the soil (Fig. 30A).
Flowers are bluish-yellow in colour, in two rows. The fruits are slightly bigger than
1 cm and oval in shape. The rootstock (Fig. 30B) is straight, about 1 cm thick, black
from outside but white internally, with prominent nodes. The root has a mucilaginous
bitter taste, it is rich in mucilage and contains oleogum resin.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

It is mainly used for diseases of the urinogenital system in both males and females
(Yadav et al. 1974). It may be used as follows:

As a diuretic
It helps in polyurea, dysuria, gonorrhoea, menorrhagia, leucorrhoea and piles.

For erectile dysfunction (impotence)
It is considered a nutritive and aphrodisiac, for which 3–6 g of root powder is given
twice daily.

As a geriatric tonic
It is used for gastroenteritis, hepatitis and as an anti-inﬂammatory agent. For most of
the diseases, 25–50 g of dry root in powdered form is boiled in milk, with sugar
                                                                              Musli 213




    Figure 30 Curculigo orchioides A herb, B root.


according to taste. In this way it exudes mucilage and has a demulcent activity, which
helps convalescent geriatric patients.
   It is also used by pulverizing equal parts of Asparagus racemosus, Curculigo orchioides,
Sphaeranthus indicus, Abrus precatorius and Butea frondosa.

  Dose   2–5 g of powder with honey or ghee.

Ayurvedic preparation

Musalyadi churn

Method Pulverize equal quantities of Curculigo, Tribulus, Bombax, Mucuna and Tinospora
(starch).
214 Musli
Dose 10–20 g with milk.

Uses In gynaecological problems due to general debility.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Fan et al. (1996) observed the inhibitory effect of the root on hepatitis virus B replication.
Rao and Mishra (1996) noted anti-inﬂammatory and hepatoprotective activity in it.


MUSLI WHITE

It may be obtained from one or more of the following plants:

    Asparagus adscendens Roxb. (Family: Liliaceae)
    A. ﬁlicinus Ham.
    Chlorophytum arundinaceum Baker (Family: Liliaceae)
    C. tuberosum Baker
    Roscoea purpurea Royle (Family: Scitaminae)

   In commerce the drug consists of white tubular translucent pieces, up to 5 mm
thick and 15 cm long. Before marketing, these are boiled in water and the outer root
coat removed. This process gelatinizes starch and on cooling the root gives a waxy
translucent appearance. When immersed in water the root regains its original shape by
absorbing water. These roots are leathery on chewing, slightly mucilaginous, with a
pleasant taste and smell.
   White musli is considered a nutritive tonic and is used in place of Orchis. Tubers
(12 g) boiled in milk are used for sexual inadequacies in both males and females.
   Dua et al. (1992) observed adaptogenic activity in Asparagus adscendens, which pro-
tects the animals against blood pressure problems following ischaemia.

References
Dua, P.R., Tandon, M., Shukla, Y.N., Thakur, R.S. Adaptogenic activity of Asparagus adscendens
  Proceedings of 25th Indian Pharmacologocal Society, Muzafarpur, Bihar, India, 5–8 December
  1992.
Fan Tao, Fu Xi Xian, Zhang Guo Qing (1996) The inhibitory effect of some Chinese herbs on
  hepatitis B virus replication in vitro and its mechanism (in Chinese). Chinese Journal of
  Experimental and Clinical Virology, 10, 27–30.
Rao, K.S., Mishra, S.H. (1996) Studies on Curculigo orchioides Gaertn. for antiinﬂammatory and
  hepatoprotective activity. Indian Drugs, 33, 20–25.
Yadav, B.B.L., Tiwari, K.C., Tiwari, V.P. (1974) A scientiﬁc study on Cucrculigo orchioides
  Gaertn. Journal for Research in Indian Medicine, 9, 109–123.
                                                                               Neem 215

39 Neem




    Azadirachta indica A. Juss
    Family: Meliaceae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is an evergreen tree, growing mainly in south Asian countries, but has recently been
introduced in the other drier parts of the world. Younger trees in dry localities may
become leaﬂess for a month or so in February to March. The leaves are exstipulate,
alternate on a long slender petiole (Fig. 31A). The tree mainly ﬂowers in May or June.
Flowers are whitish pink (Fig. 31D) and fruit 1–2 cm long, ovoid and drupe
(Fig. 31C), enclosing a shrivelled kernel (Fig. 31B).


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

A monographic account of this tree has been given by Puri (1999), so only salient
features about neem are given here.
   According to Indian mythology, the tree is of divine origin. It originated from
drops of nectar from heaven. The word neem is derived from Sanskrit nimba which
means to bestow health. Other synonyms of this name are: neta – leader of medicinal
plants, pichumarda – antileprotic, ravisamba – has healing effect like that of sunrays,
arishta – resistant to insects, krimighan – antimicrobial, sheetal – has a cooling effect on
the human system. Since ancient times, it came into prominence due to the part it
played in rural daily life in India and for its healing power in chronic and obstinate
diseases. It has been called Village Pharmacy, Heal all, and even Nature’s Drugstore.
   In earlier times the patients suffering from incurable and chronic diseases were
advised to live under neem and eat all parts of the tree. Since it is considered cool in its
effect, patients were advised to avoid all things hot in nature like animal products,
alcohol, sex, spices, etc. Milk as a part of the diet was allowed. It was so popular in
ancient India that some scholars think that, at that time, more than 50 per cent of the
Ayurvedic preparations contained neem as an ingredient. In the nineteenth century a
neem bark decoction was used for all types of fever, mainly malaria.
   Even today in the Indian sub-continent neem is a household name for treating skin
diseases. It is a common practice to take a bath in the decoction of its leaves or to chew
tender leaves as a blood puriﬁer. The fatty oil obtained from the seed is applied
216 Neem




Figure 31 Azadirachta indica: A twig, B dry kernel, C fresh fruit, D ﬂowers, Melia azedarach:
          E leaf and fruit.



externally on skin diseases or is mixed with other ingredients. The stem sap, which is
sometimes exuded by the old neem tree, is very much esteemed for general physiological
health.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Anthelmintic activity
It is effective against a large number of nematodes and in ankylostomiasis. It gave
good results as an ingredient of an anti-ﬁlarial compound.
                                                                             Neem 217
Anti-microbial activity
It has been used as a disinfectant. Some recent studies have indicated that neem extract
signiﬁcantly inhibited many pathogenic organisms. Bark and leaf extracts suppressed
fungal spore formation and in some cases were fungicidal. This activity may be due to
sulphurous compounds or the limonoid gedunin in the tree.
   Neem preparations have schizonticidal activity against various Plasmodium spp.
and Trypanosoma spp., which cause malaria and other protozoal infections. A puriﬁed
fraction of neem oil in a cream base has been found effective in leucorrhoea caused by
Chlamydia trachomatis. It was highly effective in clearing infection from the cervico-
vaginal region. A cream of neem was effective against Candida albicans, Gardnerella
vaginalis and human papilloma 16 virus infecting the female genital tract. It was pro-
phylactic against septicaemia caused by Salmonella typhi. The water extract of tender
leaves has shown anti-viral activity in some cases, so neem preparations are being tried
against HIV infection.

Anti-diabetic activity
The neem oil and the bitter principle nimbidin have signiﬁcant anti-diabetic activity,
which is comparable to that of sulphonyl urea. Neem oil lowered the blood glucose
levels of normoglycaemic and hypoglycaemic rats.
   Some commercial herbal preparations containing neem are available in India for
treating diabetes.

Anti-inﬂammatory activity
It is common practice to use neem oil, or a decoction and poultice made from leaves
and bark, for external application in gout, rheumatism, arthritis, pains, etc. Two bitter
compounds, nimbin and nimbinin, obtained from the oil were comparable to cortisone
in their action. The bark showed anti-inﬂammatory effect due to polysaccharides and
gallic acid.

Anti-tumour activity
An intraperitoneal administration of polysaccharides from bark showed in vitro activity
against Sarcoma 180 ascites tumour. In cases of mouth cancer its cytocidal effect on
malignant cells has been documented. Cytotoxic effects of limonoids have also been
reported.

Anti-ulcerogenic activity
A mixture of neem bitters had anti-gastric activity. It protected patients with Shay
ulceration and duodenal lesions.

Hepatoprotective effect
An Ayurvedic preparation Neemtwagadi kashyam, with neem bark and other herbs, is
speciﬁc for jaundice. In some experiments, neem was found effective for hepatotoxicity.
218 Neem
Immunomodulator property
Earlier anti-stress properties was recorded for neem oil, but recent studies conﬁrmed
that bark has an immunomodulator property. The compounds responsible for the
inhibition of chemiluminescence production by activated human polymorphonuclear
leucocytes have been isolated and identiﬁed. The anti-malarial effect of neem also
appears to be due to the body mobilizing the immune system to suppress infection.

Chemical studies
Recently limonoids have been studied extensively. Azadirachtin is an important com-
pound out of these.

Toxicological studies
Neem preparations have been considered safe because the leaves are used as fodder by
ruminants. Recent studies indicated that extracts of leaf, bark and isolated limonoids
have very low toxicity, but seed oil is not very safe in the prescribed doses.

Substitutes
The neem tree is sometimes confused with China berry, Melia azedarach, but can be
easily differentiated from this tree by leaf morphology and shape of the seed
(Figs. 31D, E).

Reference
Puri, H.S. Neem The Divine tree, Azadirachta indica. Harwood Academic Publishers, Amsterdam,
  Holland 1999.
                                                                           Peepali   219

40 Peepali




    Piper longum L
    P. peepuloides Roxb.
    P. retrofractum Vahl.
    Family: Piperaceae

THE PLANTS AND THEIR DISTRIBUTION
P. longum is an underground creeper or under-shrub which roots from the nodes
and grows in the sub-tropical climate of the Indian subcontinent. The leaves are
alternate, ovate, 5–12 cm long, acuminate and have a cordate base (Fig. 32A). Flowers
are unisexual, green or yellow with berries (Fig. 32B) crowded in a black spike,
1–2 cm long and 2–3 mm in diameter. When chewed it is greenish, slimy with
a spicy odour and mild pungent smell, slightly different from that of black pepper.
P. peepuloides (Fig. 32C) has a mulberry-like fruiting spike, while in P. longum it is
compact.
   The fruiting spike used as peepali is mainly obtained from various cultivars of
P. longum and allied species. Fruiting spikes are aborted in one of the cultivars, which
is known as Navsari peepal in the trade. Another cultivar, growing in east India has
globular fruiting spikes. The fruiting spike of P. retrofractum (Fig. 32D), called bari
peepal (bari is big, in this case fruiting spikes are more than double the size of common
peepali), is probably imported from Malaysia and Indonesia. Some people probably
prefer this because of its bigger size and pungency. The root of Piper species, under the
name peeplamul, is widely used in Ayurvedic medicines. Another Ayurvedic herb called
gaj pipal (gaj means elephant), is also known which has a big fruiting spike. It is
obtained from Scindapsus ofﬁcinalis. The tree Ficus religiosa is also known as peepal, so
sometimes there is confusion between peepal and peepali as both the plants have cordate,
acuminate leaves.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

In Ayurveda it is considered a digestant, a Rasayana, sweet, slightly hot, bitter, anti-
kaph and is a laxative. It is said to be useful in bronchial troubles, stomach diseases,
fevers, leprosy, diabetes, piles, arthritis and inﬂammation. The detailed uses of peepali
are:
220 Peepali




    Figure 32 Piper longum: A twig, B fruiting spike, C P. peepuloides: fruiting spike,
              D P. retrofractum: fruiting spike.



For respiratory problems
Equal parts of honey with peepali, or double quantity of raw sugar with peepali, helps
fevers and respiratory problems. For coughs with phlegm, fry peepali in ghee and
powder it. Take half a tablespoon of this powder with 1 g of salt and two table-
spoons of honey thrice daily. Peepali, when boiled in milk, is a smooth muscle relaxant,
                                                                          Peepali   221
anti-allergic and used for prophylaxis of asthma. Boil one fruiting spike in milk on the
ﬁrst day and eat it with the milk. On the second day take two fruiting spikes, three on
third day and so on, increasing the number every day until intolerable. This treatment
relieves chronic respiratory diseases but may cause heartburn.

For ﬂatulence
Take 1 g of peepali powder and 2 g salt, mix in yogurt and drink. It causes the gas
to escape from the stomach and thus provides relief for motions. It also helps appetite
less.

For piles and haemorrhoids
In piles with or without blood, take 1/2 g of the peepali powder, 1 g of roasted cumin,
add salt as per taste, mix in yogurt milk and drink.

For sciatica
Take half a tablespoon of ﬁnely powdered peepali along with two teaspoons of castor
oil, twice daily.

For obesity
Take 1/2 spoon peepali powder with honey twice daily, for 2–3 months.

For conjunctivitis
Make a ﬁne powder of 5 g peepali and 10 g haritaki. Moisten these powders with water
and after kneading turn it into a candle-like structure and dry. Before use grind this
candle on a wet rough stone and apply the paste onto the eyelids.

For gastroenteritis
Take an equal quantity of peepali and dried young haritaki fruit. Make a ﬁne powder of
these. Take one tablespoon of this mixture.

As an anthelmintic
For worm infestations, one part take peepali powder, two parts raw sugar, mix and take
a dose of half a tablespoon with water.

Ayurvedic preparations

Peepali quath
Boil 20 g of coarse peepali powder with one glassful of water until reduced to half.
Divide the resultant decoction into three equal doses and add honey. Drink thrice
daily for chronic fevers and spleen enlargement until cured.
222 Peepali
Pachak peepali
Soak peepali in lime juice, add salt and keep for seven days. Chew two of these peepali
in the morning and evening for indigestion, lack of appetite, etc.

Peepali churn

Method Make a ﬁne powder of 50 g each of peepali, Cyperus scariosus, Aconitum
heterophyllum and Pistacia lentiscus gall.

Dose 1 g with honey.

Use For fevers, loose motions, gastroenteritis, vomiting, coughs, colds, etc. in infants
and children.

Peepali pak

Method Boil 100 g of ﬁnely powdered P. longum in two litres of milk until the whole
mass turns semi-solid. Roast it in ghee and add half a kilogram of sugar syrup, heat
until solid. Make candy balls of 10–20 g each.

Dose Take one candy ball with milk after food.

Use   It increases digestive power.

Peepali assav

Method Take 125 g Woodfordia ﬂowers, 750 g dry black grapes, 3.85 kg sugar and 5 g
each of coarsely powdered long and black pepper, Piper cubeba, turmeric, Plumbago
zeylanicum root, Cyperus scariosus, Embelia ribes, Piper betle, areca nut, Symplocos racemosus,
Cissampelos pareira, Emblica ofﬁcinalis, aloe juice dry, Vetiveria, Santalum album, Saus-
surea, clove, valerian, Nardostachys grandiﬂora, cinnamon, cardamom, Cinnamomum spp.
leaves, Mesua ferrea and Callicarpa macrophylla. Crush grapes and add the above herbs
and sugar in a pot with 5.25 litres of water and let it ferment for 45 days. When
ready, ﬁlter and pour it into bottles.

Dose 25 ml.

Use   It is a general tonic, particularly useful in digestive and respiratory problems.

Contraindication
Preparations containing peepali should not be used in the case of blisters, dryness and
persistent bitter taste in the mouth, red eyes, hot and watery face, inﬂammation of the
body and sleeplessness.
                                                                             Peepali   223
THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Tripathi et al. (1996) reviewed Piper spp. for the phytochemistry and biological activ-
ity. The important aspects of this study are given below.

Trikatu
In Ayurveda, a composition consisting of long pepper, black pepper and ginger is very
often incorporated into various formulations under the name Trikatu. In some research
(Atal et al. 1981) it was found that Trikatu enhanced the bioavailability of other ther-
apeutic agents. Zutshi and Kaul (1982) observed that individual members, as well as
Trikatu collectively, increased the bioavailability of vaccines by 300 per cent when orally
ingested. The same effect was seen in long and black pepper, and it was found that
this activity is due to the alkaloid piperine. Lee et al. (1984) carried out a pharmaco-
logical study on piperine. Bano et al. (1987) noted that piperine altered the pharmaco-
kinetic parameters of phenytoin. Majumdar et al. (1990) also observed that piperine
makes pentabarbitone more potent and thus increases sleeping time by inhibiting
liver enzymes. Annamalai and Manavalan (1990) also conﬁrmed that Trikatu enhanced
the therapeutic activity by reducing acid secretion and preventing the degradation of
active medicaments by gastric acids. Majeed et al. (1996) patented the use of piperine
for gastro-intestinal absorption and its systemic utilization in nutritional supplements.
Shoba et al. (1998) conﬁrmed that Trikatu enhanced the bioavailability of drugs.

Anti-allergic action
Dahanukar et al. (1984) observed this activity of peepali in childhood asthma when
fed to children both under and above the age of ﬁve. This treatment reduced the
severity of attacks. It reduced passive cutaneous anaphylaxis and protected against
antigen-induced bronchiospasm (Dahanukar and Karandikar, 1984).

Vasodilator effect
Shoji et al. (1986) isolated a compound dehydropperonaline from it, which possessed
coronary vasodilating activity.

Analgesic activity
Eun (1986) fed piperine from P. longum to experimental rats to study the mechanism
of its analgesic action. This alkaloid showed profound analgesia, it increased the level
of β-endorphin in the midbrain and decreased opiate binding.

Anti-cancerous property
Reen and Singh (1991) noted that piperine caused the inhibition of pulmonary cyto-
chrome P 450 both in vitro and in vivo. It protected against AFBI-induced cytotoxicity
and micronuclei formation in H4IIEC3 rat hepatoma cells. It markedly reduced the
224 Peepali
toxicity of mycotoxins. It was capable of counteracting AFBI toxicity by suppressing
cytochrome P-450 mediated bioactivation of mycotoxins (Singh et al. 1994).

Anti-ulcer activity
Gursahani and Vasudevan (1994) observed anti-nuclear activity in piperine. Oral
administration of this alkaloid signiﬁcantly inhibited ulceration. It had a protective
action on gastric mucosa.

Hepatoprotective effect
Koul and Kapil (1993) noted that piperine inhibited the metabolism of drugs by the
liver. It also had a liver protective effect.
   A marketed Ayurvedic preparation containing Thespesia populnea, cardamum, ginger,
liquorice, long pepper and honey showed marked anti-hepatotoxicity activity in the
laboratory as well as in clinical studies (Shirwalke et al. 1990).

Anti-microbial activity
Kapil (1993) tried piperine against Leishmania donovani, which causes kala-azar or
black fever and found it a potent inhibitor of this pathogen. Ghoshal et al. (1996) found
anti-amoebic activity in P. longum fruit, against Entamoeba histolytica caecal amoebiasis.
The ethanol extract cured 90 per cent of rats.

Anabolic effect
Singh and Guru (1972) noted an anabolic effect in the preparation Pippali Rasayna.
Singh et al. (1973) found analeptic activity in the alkaloids. Tripathi et al. (1989)
noted a thyrogenic response in long pepper. It increased the basal metabolic rates with
signiﬁcant enhancement in the tissue’s oxygen uptake and thyroid peroxidase activity.

In bronchial asthma
Anshuman (1984) tried an Ayurvedic preparation Vardhman Peepali (peepali boiled in
milk) and found it effective for respiratory disorders and in bronchial asthma.

In dysentery
Aggarwal et al. (1994) tried Pippali Rasayana prepared from Peepali and Butea seed for
chronic dysentery and worm infestation. The preparation was tested for anti-giardial
and immunostimulating activity. There was up to 80 per cent recovery from infection.
It did not kill parasites directly but by host resistance, by inducing signiﬁcant activity
on macrophages, as was indicated by increased macrophage migration index and
phagocytic activity. Agrawal et al. (1997) carried out further studies of Pippali Rasayana
on giardiasis. After 15 days of treatment there was complete disappearance of Giardia
lamblia (G. duodenalis) and a reduction of mucus and pus cells. The recovery rate was
92 per cent with no abdominal discomfort.
                                                                                 Peepali   225
In muscular weakness
Dasture (1994) tried two Ayurvedic herbomineral preparations containing Trikatu for
muscular weakness. Both of these potentiated electrically induced contractions. D’Hooge
et al. (1996) observed anti-convulsant properties in piperine. It signiﬁcantly blocked
convulsions induced by receptor agonists.

Chemical studies
It contains 0.7 per cent essential oil, the alkaloids piperine and piplartine, as well as
the other compounds sesamin and pillasterol. In the root, piperine, piplartine and
piperlonguimine alkaloids are present (Thakur et al. 1989).

Substitutes
The roots of Piper longum are well known under the name piplamul. It is said to be mild
but inferior in effect, compared with peepali. It is available in small cylindrical pieces
of nodal and internodal pieces, about 2 mm thick. The nodal pieces are considered
superior to internodal ones.

References
Agarwal, A.K., Singh, M., Gupta, N., Saxena, R., Puri, A., Verma, A.K. (1994) Management of
  giardiasis by an immunomodulatory herbal drug Pippali rasayana. Journal of Ethnopharmacology,
  44, 143–146.
Agarwal, A.K., Tripathi, D.M., Sahai, R., Gupta, N., Saxena, R.P., Puri, A., Singh, M., Misra,
  R.N., Dubey, C.B., Saxena, K.C. (1997) Management of giardiasis by a herbal drug Pipali
  Rasayana: a clinical study. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 56, 223–236.
Annamalai, A.R., Manavalan, R. (1990) Effect of Trikatu and its individual components
  and piperine on gastrointestinal tracts: Trikatu-a bioavailable enhancer. Indian Drugs, 27,
  595–604.
Anshuman, P.S., Singh, K.P., Aasra, K.G. (1984) Effect of Vardhman Pippali (Piper longum) on
  patients with respiratory disorders. Sachitra Ayurveda, 37, 47–49.
Atal, C.K., Zutshi, U., Rao, P.G. (1981) Scientiﬁc evidence on the role of Ayurvedic herbals on
  bioavailability of drugs. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 4, 229–232.
Bano, G., Amla, V., Raina, R.K., Zutshi, U., Chopra, C.L. (1987) The effect of piperine on
  pharmacokinetics of phenytoin in healthy volunteers. Planta Medica, 53, 568–569.
Dahanukar, S.A., Karandikar, S.M. (1984) Evaluation of antiallergic activity of Piper longum.
  Indian Drugs, 21, 377–383.
Dahanukar, S.A., Karandikar, S.M., Desai, M. (1984) Efﬁcacy of Piper longum in childhood
  asthma. Indian Drugs, 21, 384–388.
Dasture, A.V. (1994) Screening of two Ayurvedic preparations for usefulness in treatment of
  muscular weakness. Deerghayu International, 1, 3–8.
D’Hooge, R., Pei, Yinquan, Raes A., Lebrun, P., Bogaert, P.P. van, Deyn, P.P. de (1996)
  Anticonvulsant activity of piperine on seizures induced by excitatory amino acid receptor
  agonists. Arzneimittel Forschung, 46, 557–560.
Eun, J.S. (1986) A study on the mechanism of analgesic action of piperine. Yakhak Hoeji, 30,
  169–173.
Ghoshal, S., Prasad, B.N.K., Laksmi, V. (1996) Antiamoebic activity of Piper longum fruits
  against Entamoeba histolytica in vitro and in vivo. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 50, 167–170.
226 Peepali
Gursahani, H.I., Vasudevan, T.N. Antiulcer activity of piperine. Proceedings 46th Indian Phar-
   maceutical Congress, Chandigarh, India, 28–30 December 1994.
Kapil, A. (1993) Piperine: a potent inhibitor of Leishmania donovani in vitro. Planta Medica,
   59, 474.
Koul, I.B., Kapil, A. (1993) Evaluation of the liver protetctive potential of piperine, an active
   principle of black and long peppers. Planta Medica, 59, 413– 417.
Lee, E.B., Shin, K.H., Woo, W.S. (1984) Pharmacological study on piperine. Archives Pharm.
   Research, 7, 127–132.
Majumdar, A.M., Dhuley, J.N., Deshmukh, V.K., Raman, P.H., Thorat, S.L., Naik, S.R.
   (1990) Effect of piperine on pentobarbitone-induced hypnosis in rats. Indian Journal of
   Experimental Biology, 28, 485– 487.
Majed, M., Badmaev, V., Rajendran, R. Use of piperine to increase the bioavailability of
   nutritional compounds. Patent to Sabinasa Corporation, Piscataway, N.J., U.S. Patent 5,536,506,
   dated 19 July, 1996.
Ray, K.P.S. (1979) Pepper. Indian Drugs, 16, 199–203.
Reen, R.K., Singh, J. (1991) In vitro and in vivo inhibition of pulmonary cytochrome, P 450
   activity by piperine, a major ingredient of Piper species. Indian Journal of Experimental
   Biology, 29, 556–573.
Shirwalker, A., Kumar, A.V., Sreenivasan, K.K., Gundu Rao, P. Evaluation of a marketed
   antihepatotoxic Ayurvedic preparation. Proceedings of 42nd Annual Indian Pharmaceutical Con-
   gress, Manipal, 28–30 December 1990.
Shoba, G., Joy, D., Joseph, T., Majeed, M., Rajendra, R., Srinivasan, P.S.S.R. (1998) Inﬂuence
   of piperine on the pharmcokinetics of curcumin in animals and human volunteers. Planta
   Medica, 64, 353–356.
Shoji, N., Umajawo, A., Saito, N., Talemoto, T., Rajiwara, A., Ohizumu, Y. (1986) Dehydrop-
   peronaline: an amide possessing coronary vasodilating activity isolated from Piper longum L.
   Journal of Pharmaceutical Science, 75, 1188–1189.
Singh, I.P., Guru, L.V. (1972) A preliminary study on the effect of alcoholic extractive of
   Pippali Rasayna on serum proteins of experimental animals. Journal of Research in Indian
   Medicine, 7, 81–84.
Singh, J., Reen, R.K., Wiebel, F.J. (1994) Piperine, a major ingredient of black and long
   peppers, protects against AfB1-incuded cytotoxicity and micronuclei formation in H4IIEC3
   rat hepatoma cells. Cancer Letters, 86, 195–200.
Singh, N., Kulshrestha, Srivatava, R.K., Kohli, R.P. (1973) Studies on the analeptic activity of
   some Piper longum alkaloids. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, 8, 1–9.
Tripathi, A.K., Jain, D.C., Sushil Kumar (1996) Secondary metabolites and their biological
   and medicinal activities of Piper species plants. Journal of Medicinal and Aromatic Plant
   Sciences, 18, 302–321.
Tripathi, P., Tripathi, G.S., Tripathi, Y.B. (1989) Thyrogenic response of Piper nigrum. Fitoterapia,
   60, 539–542.
Zutshi, U., Kaul, J.L. (1982) The impact of ayurvedic herbals on drug bio-availability. Indian
   Drugs, 19, 476–479.
                                                                         Punernava 227

41 Punernava




    Boerhaavia diffusa L.
    Family: Nyctagenaceae

THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION
It is a common prostate or ascending creeping weed, purple in colour (Fig. 33A),
which grows throughout the warmer parts of India on sandy and rocky soil. The stem
is thickened at the nodes. The leaves are ovate or suborbicular, rounded at the apex,
2–4 cm long, margin entire, pink, with a base that is rounded to subcordate. Flowers
are very small (4–6mm), in umbels arranged in panicles.
   In Ayurvedic literature two types of punernava, red and white, are mentioned.
B. diffusa and the allied species B. repanda and B. erecta with reddish leaves and
commonly with violet pink ﬂowers are considered the source of the red variety
but there is controversy about the correct identiﬁcation of white punernava. At
one stage Trianthema monogyna L., which is a prostate, succulent herb that grows in
the rainy season in damp places and has both pink and white ﬂowers was thought
to be white punernava (Singh and Udupa, 1972a). However B. verticillata R. Br. has
now been identiﬁed as the source of this drug. It is a robust form but very rare
in nature.
   Punernava (Fig. 33B) is a woody rootstock, ﬁbrous, twisted like rope, usually less
than 1 cm thick and brownish in colour. When pressure is applied to it, it liberates
white powder which causes a light itching. It has no characteristic taste or smell. To
conﬁrm the source of commercial samples, Surange et al. (1973) carried out a com-
parative pharmacological study on the genuine root and commercial samples and
found that both have the same activities.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

In Ayurveda punernava is used as antidote to toxins, a rejuvenator and a Rasayana as
follows:

For cardiac problems
In oedema, it is given with equal quantities of Picrorhiza, Swertia and ginger. It is said
to have a Digitalis-like effect.
228 Punernava




   Figure 33 Boerhaavia diffusa A herb, B root.
                                                                          Punernava 229
For bronchial troubles
For coughs with sputum and inﬂammation, it is given with equal quantities of calamus
and ginger. This medicament causes nausea but clears the bronchial tubes of all
extraneous matter.

For liver problems
The distillate from the herb is considered effective in controlling cirrhosis of the liver.

As a diuretic
It is used for oedema, inﬂammation, nephrotic conditions, jaundice, ascites and for
scanty urine.

Ayurvedic preparation

Punernava mundur

Method Pulverize 200 g of following mixture of herbs in equal quantities: Boerhaavia,
Operculina turpethum, ginger, black pepper, long pepper, Embelia ribes, Cedrus deodara,
Saussurea lappa, turmeric, Plumbago zeylanica, Terminalia bellirica, T. chebula, Emblica
ofﬁcinalis, Baliospermum montanum, Piper cubeba, Holarrhena antidysentrica seed, Picrorhiza
kurroa, Piper longum root, Cyperus scariosus, Pistacia lentiscus, Carum carvi, Ptychotis and
Myrica nagi. Take 400 g of processed iron rust in 1,600 ml of cow’s urine in an iron
pot. (Iron rust is processed by ﬁrst heating it strongly on coal and immersing in cow’s
urine when red hot. This treatment is repeated seven times. The rust is powdered and
mixed with an infusion of Triphala. The whole mixture is dried and heated thirty
times. In the end a brick-red coloured iron compound is obtained.) Boil the rust in the
urine until it is reduced to one-fourth. Add the powder of herbs prepared above to this
rust and heat the whole mixture until it is thick enough for making pills of pea size.

Dose 2– 4 pills twice daily with raw sugar, followed by water.

Uses It is prescribed for hepatic diseases, such as inﬂammation, swelling accompa-
nied by ﬂatulence, mild fever, indigestion, anaemia, spleen enlargement and weakness.
It helps excretion of both urine and faeces, and increases respiratory rate. It stimulates
blood circulation, which results in reduced swellings of the liver and spleen, as well as
reducing oedema.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

As a diuretic
The ash of the plant is rich in potassium nitrate and for a long time it was considered
that the diuretic action of the herb was attributed to this (Thakur et al. 1989). Earlier
230 Punernava
studies indicate that punernava increased urinary output but decreased urinary albumin
and speciﬁc gravity. Singh and Udupa (1972 a, b, c) observed that the best results with
this herb were seen in oedema due to renal diseases. It had a urinary antiseptic effect and
improved the pattern of renal recovery. It showed cardiotonic, hypertensive and smooth
muscles relaxant effects. These authors postulated that it increased urine output due to
its cardiotonic effect. The increase in the cardiac output raised the blood pressure,
leading to an increase in the renal blood ﬂow and improved glomerular ﬁltration rate.
It was useful in nephrotic syndrome. The root extract studied by Mudgal (1974, 1975)
had a better diuretic, anti-inﬂammatory property and it improved renal recovery faster.
When given to patients of nephrotic syndrome by Singh (1991), the root, in powder
form, was as effective as cortisone and modern diuretics. Punernava increased serum protein
and immunoglobulin levels but reduced urinary protein excretion (Singh et al. 1992).

As an anabolic agent
Appa Rao et al. (1967, 1969) studied the Rasayana effect of the powdered root on
human volunteers. A moderate decrease in the mean levels of blood urea and serum
acid phosphates was observed. Rajgopalan et al. (1977) observed that it caused nitrogen
retention through its action on the liver, which helped growth and longevity.

Anti-hepatotoxic activity
Chakraborti and Handa (1989) found anti-hepatotoxic activity in petroleum ether,
chloroform and methanol extracts of B. repand root. Rawat et al. (1997) tried powders and
aqueous extracts of various sized roots. The aqueous extract (2 ml/kg) of a root of dia-
meter 1–3 cm, collected in May, was more effective compared with the other root powders.

In ulcers due to stress
Sharma et al. (1991a) observed that the herb protected animals from stress and
haemorrhagic ulcers. It had differential effects on the GABA levels of various regions
of the brain (Sharma et al. 1991b). Mungantiwar et al. (1997) found that the alkaloid
fraction of the root possessed restorative activity against stress-induced changes in
plasma and cortical levels in rats. It signiﬁcantly augmented the antibody production
in stressed rats.

Effect on enzymatic systems
Goswami and Sarma (1992) administered crystalline alkaloids of this herb to experi-
mental animals to study catalase and adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) activity. In
the initial stages there was no alteration in catalase activity, but it decreased signiﬁc-
antly after two hours. ATPase activity, after the administration of the alkaloids,
increased after 45 minutes and reached its peak after 135 minutes.

Cardiotonic effect
Punarnavoside, a new anti-ﬁbrinolytic agent, has been isolated from the root by Jain
and Khanna (1989). A lignan isolated from the roots exhibited a signiﬁcant calcium
channel antagonistic effect in a frog’s heart single cell (Lami et al. 1991).
                                                                                Punernava 231
In sexual inadequacy
The root powder in a dose of 500 mg, twice daily for 15 days, was effective against
leucorrhoea and spermatorrhoea (Singh, 1991).

Toxicological studies
The ethanol extract was administered twice daily in pregnant female albino rats dur-
ing the entire period of gestation. It did not have any teratogenic effect or foetal
abnormality (Singh et al. 1991).

References
Appa Rao, M.V.R., Rajagopalan, S.S., Srinivasan, V.R., Sarangan, R. (1969) Study of Mandook-
   parni and Punernava for their Rasayana effect on normal healthy adults. Nagarjun, 12, 33.
Appa Rao, M.V.R., Usha, S.P., Rajagopalan, S.S., Sarangan, R. (1967) Six months’ result of
   double blind clinical trial to study effect of Mandookparni and Puneranava on normal adults.
   Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, 2, 79.
Chakraborti, K.K., Handa, S.S. (1989) Antihepatotoxic investigations on Boerhaavia repand
   Willd. Indian Drugs, 27, 161–166.
Goswami, P., Sarma, T.C. (1992) Effect of Boerhaavia diffusa Linn. extracts on the activities of
   enzyme systems. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 13, 135–140.
Jain, G.K., Khanna, N.M. (1989) Punarnavoside, a new antiﬁbrinolytic agent from Boerhaavia
   diffusa Linn. Indian Journal of Chemistry, 28B, 163–166.
Lami, N., Kadota, S., Kikuchi, T., Momose, Y. (1991) Constituents of the roots of Boerhaavia
   diffusa L. III Identiﬁcation of Ca 2+ channel antagonistic compound from the methanol
   extract. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 39, 1551–1555.
Mudgal, V. (1974) Comparative studies on the anti-inﬂammatory and diuretic action with
   different parts of the plant Boerhaavia diffusa Linn. (Punernava). Journal of Research in Indian
   Medicine, 9, 57–58.
Mudgal, V. (1975) Studies on medicinal properties of Convolvulus pluricaulis and Boerhaavia
   diffusa. Planta Medica, 28, 62–68.
Mungantiwar, A.A., Nair, A.M., Shinde, U.A., Saraf, M.N. (1997) Effect of stress on plasma
   and adrenal cortisol levels and immune responsiveness in rats: modulation by alkaloidal
   fraction of Boerhaavia diffusa. Fitoterapia, 68, 498–500.
Rajagopalan, S.S., Appa Rao. M.V.R., Rao, T.K., Sitaraman, R., Lakshmipathi, A. (1977)
   Effects of Punernava on longevity, growth and tissue composition of albino rats. Nagarjun,
   20, 23–27.
Rawat, A.K.S., Mehrotra, S., Tripathi, S.C., Shome, U. (1997) Hepatoprotective activity of
   Boerhaavia diffusa L. roots – a popular Indian ethnomedicine. Journal of Ethnopharmacolgy, 56,
   61–66.
Sharma, K., Pasha, V.K., Dandiya, P.C. (1991a) Effect of Boerhaavia diffusa on behavioural,
   biochemical and pathological manifestations of stress. Proceedings 24th Indian Pharmacological
   Society Conference, Ahmedabad, 29–31 December 1991.
Sharma, K., Pasha, V.K., Dandiya, P.C. (1991b) Effect of Boerhaavia diffusa Linn on GABA
   levels of the brain during stress (abstract). Conference of Pharmacology and Symposium on Herbal
   drugs, New Delhi, 15 March 1991.
Singh, A., Singh, R.G., Singh, R.H., Mishra, N., Singh, N. (1991) An experimental evalua-
   tion of possible teratogenic potential in Boerhaavia diffusa in albino rats. Planta Medica, 57,
   315–316.
Singh, R.H., Udupa, K.N. (1972a) Studies on the indigenous drug Punernava (Boerhaavia
   diffusa Linn.). Part I Identiﬁcation and pharmacognostical studies. Journal of Research in
   Indian Medicine, 7, 1–12.
232 Punernava
Singh, R.H., Udupa, K.N. (1972b) Studies on the indigenous drug Punernava (Boerhaavia
   diffusa Linn.). Part III. Experimental and Pharamacological studies. Journal of Research in
   Indian Medicine, 7, 17–27.
Singh, R.H., Udupa, K.N. (1972c) Studies on the indigenous drug Punernava (Boerhaavia
   diffusa Linn.). Part IV. Preliminary controlled trials in nephrotic syndrome. Journal of Research
   in Indian Medicine, 7, 28–33.
Singh, R.P., Shukla, K.P., Pandey, B.L., Singh, R.G., Usha Singh, R.H. (1992) Recent ap-
   proach in clinical and experimental evaluation of diuretic action of Punarnava (Boerhaavia
   diffusa) with special reference to nephrotic syndrome. Journal of Research and Education in
   Indian Medicine, 11, 29–36.
Singh, S.P. (1991) Therapeutic activity of Punarnava (Boerhaavia repanda Willd) root powder.
   Journal of Research and Education in Indian Medicine, 10, 23–25.
Surange, S.R., Pataskar, R.D., Pendse, G.S. (1973) Comparative pharmacological studies on
   roots of genuine and commercial samples of Boerhaavia diffusa Linn. (Punernava). Journal of
   Research in Indian Medicine, 8, 4.
Thakur, R.S., Puri, H.S., Akhtar Hussain Major Medicinal Plants of India. Central Institute of
   Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Lucknow, India 1989.
                                                                       Pushkarmul 233

42 Pushkarmul




    Inula racemosa Hook f.
    Family: Asteraceae (Compositae)


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

The herb (Fig. 34A) may grow up to 2 m tall. The leaves are big, 20– 40 cm long and
12–20 cm broad. The outer surface of its leaves are rough, lower hirsuate and margin
dentate. Inﬂorescence is 4–5 cm in diameter. Its root (Fig. 34B) is thick tuberous, horny,
with a slight orris-camphoraceous smell. It grows in the alpine region of the western
Himalayas, along with Saussurea lappa and very often one is substituted for the other.
   The Ayurvedic name of the plant, pushkarmul (Pushkar is sun, and mul root in
Sanskrit), is often used in a corrupted form, pohkarmul, in Indian trade. Genuine root is
hard to obtain and very often S. lappa root is supplied instead. Some people consider
orris root obtained from Iris germanica or even I. ﬂorentina a source of pushakarmul,
while others think that I. racemosa is the source of another Ayurvedic herb, rasna
(Chunekar and Pandey, 1969).


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

It is considered a diuretic, stimulant, digestant, anti-inﬂammatory, anthelmintic and
bronchodilator. It causes contraction of the uterus and the respiratory system, relieves
swellings, backache and rheumatic pain. It is an antidote to poison (ama) developed
within the body. For skin diseases such as ringworm and itching, decoction of the root
is used for washing, and the root macerated in cow’s urine is applied externally as a
cataplasm.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

In heart diseases
Tripathi et al. (1984a, 1988) assessed the adrenergic beta blocking activity of
root powder in ischaemic heart diseases. Petroleum ether extract of the root lowered
234 Pushkarmul




    Figure 34 Inula racemosa A twig, B root.



plasma insulin and glucose levels within 75 minutes of oral administration. It
counteracted adrenaline and induced hyperglycaemia in rats. Sati and Sharma (1990)
tried it for congestive cardiac failure. Arora et al. (1995) evaluated the cardiopro-
tective activity of the drug in coronary artery diseases, hypertension and diabetes
mellitus.
   Pushkar Guggal (2 g), a mixture of Commiphora and Inula, was administered three
times daily for 4 months in angina pectoris and in the management of ischaemic heart
diseases. By this treatment periodical pain, discomfort and dysphonia were controlled.
It decreased mean serum cholesterol (Sharma and Gupta, 1983, Tripathi et al. 1984b,
Sharma et al. 1986a,b, Singh et al. 1991, 1993).
   Dwivedi et al. (1987) tried a polyherbal preparation containing pushkarmul, Saussurea
lappa and Terminalia arjuna for heart diseases. It enhanced the aortic prostaglandin
E2.
                                                                                 Pushkarmul 235
In diabetes
Singh et al. (1985) used this root with Cinnamomum tamala leaves and found it to be
very effective for diabetes. Tripathi and Chaturvedi (1995) observed that alcohol extract
lowered blood glucose and enhanced liver glycogen without an increase in plasma
insulin. It may be due to enhanced insulin synthesis. It had no effect on the adrenal
gland. Chaturvedi et al. (1995) studied its effect on glucose levels in albino rats.
Ethanol extract, 400 mg/kg, lowered plasma glucose level four hours after administra-
tion. It increased the concentration of liver glycogen and reduced the concentration of
plasma insulin, which returned to normal after four hours.

Hepatoprotective effect
Rao and Mishra (1997) found that the root was effective in liver diseases.

Anti-asthmatic effect
Singh et al. (1980) observed its anti-asthmatic, anti-spasmodic activity. The alcohol
extract of the root protected against bronchiospasms induced by histamines, pollen,
etc.

As a hypolipidaemic agent
It reduced fatty acids, triglycerides, total serum lipids and cholesterol (Ojha et al.
1977). Singh et al. (1993) tried Pushkar guggal on 200 hypolipidaemia patients and
observed good results.

Anti-microbial property
The essential oil from I. helenium was effective against bacteria and fungi (Bourrel et al.
1993). Note: This root also contains inulin, and some of the above pharmacological
activities, as detailed under Saussurea lappa, may be due to this compound.

Chemical studies
The root contains inulin and essential oil. The other active constituent is alantolactone.

Toxicological studies
In large doses it causes nausea and vomiting.

References
Arora, R.C., Agarwal, N., Arora, S., Kanchan, S.N. (1995) Evaluation of CT (cardioprotective
  drug) in subjects of coronary artery diseases, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus. Flora and
  Fauna, 1, 203–205.
Bourrrel, C., Vilarem, G., Perinean, F. (1993) Chemical analysis, bacteriostatic and fungistatic
  properties of the essential oil of Elecampane (Inula helenium L). Journal of Essential Oil Research,
  5, 411– 417.
236 Pushkarmul
Chaturvedi, P., Shukla, S., Tripathi, P., Chaurasia, S., Singh, S.K., Tripathi, Y.B. (1995)
   Comparative study of Inula racemosa and Saussurea lappa on the glucose levels in albino
   rats. Ancient Science of Life, 15, 62–70.
Chunekar, K.C. Pandey, G.S. Bhavprakash Nighantu (in Hindi). Chowkhamba Vidyabhawan,
   Varanasi India, 1969.
Dwivedi, S., Chansouria, J.P.N., Mani, P.N., Udupa, K.N. (1987) Inﬂuence of certain indig-
   enous drugs on the prostaglandin E2 like activity in the ischaemic aorta. Indian Drugs, 24,
   378–382.
Ojha, J.K., Sharma, P.V., Bajpai, H.S. (1977) Inula racemosa (pushkarmul) – a hypolipid
   agent, an experimental and clinical study. Indian Journal of Pharmacy, 39, 176.
Rao, K.S., Mishra, S.H. (1997) Hepatoprotective activity of Inula racmosa root. Fitoterapia 68,
   510–514.
Sati, R.B., Sharma, R.K. (1990) Management of congestive cardiac failure with cardiac drugs.
   Aryavaidyan, 4, 123–126.
Sharma, S.D., Gupta, V.K. (1983) A clinical assessment of Commiphora mukul (Guggulu) and
   Inula racemosa (Pushkarmula) for the treatment of coronary heart disease (Hridroga). Journal
   National Integrated Medicine Association, 25, 384–393.
Sharma, S.D., Upadhyay, B.N., Tripathi, S.N. (1986a) A new Ayurvedic compound for the
   management of ischaemic heart disease (Hrdyroga). Ancient Science of Life, 5, 161–167.
Sharma, S.D., Upadhyay, B.N., Tripathi, S.N. (1986b) Ayurvedic therapy for coronary heart
   disease (hridyaroga). Journal National Integrated Medical Association, 26, 249–253.
Singh, N., Nath, R., Gupta, M.L., Kohli, R.P. (1980) An experimental evaluation of anti-
   asthmatic potentialities of Inula racemosa. (Puskar Mul). Quarterly Journal of Crude Drug
   Research, 18, 89–96.
Singh, R., Singh, R.P., Batliwala, P.G., Upadhyaya, B.N., Tripathi, S.N. (1991) Pushkar
   Guggal an antianginal and hypolipidemic agent in coronary heart disease (CHD). Journal of
   Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 12, 1–18.
Singh, R.P., Singh, R., Ram, P., Batliwala, P.G. (1993) Use of Pushkar Guggal, an indig-
   enous, antischemic combination in the management of ischaemic heart disease. International
   Journal of Pharmacology, 31, 147–160.
Singh, T.N., Upadhyay, B.N., Tewari, C.M., Tripathi, S.N. (1985) Management diabetes
   mellitus (Premeha) with Inula racemosa and Cinnamoum tamala. Ancient Science of Life, 5, 9–16.
Tripathi, S.N., Upadhyaya, B.N., Gupta, V.K. (1984) Beneﬁcial effect of Inula racemosa
   (Pushkarmoola) in Angina pectoris: A preliminary report. Indian Journal of Physiology and
   Pharmacology, 28, 73–75.
Tripathi, S.N., Upadhyay, B.N., Sharma, S.D., Gupta, V.K., Tripathi, Y.B. (1984a) Role
   of Pushkara Guggal in the management of ischaemic heart disease. Ancient Science of Life, 4,
   9–19.
Tripathi, T.B., Tripathi, P., Upadhyay, B.N. (1988) Assessment of the andenergic beta-
   blocking activity of Inula racemosa. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 23, 3–9.
Tripathi, Y.B., Chaturvedi, P. (1995) Assessment of endocrine response of Inula racemosa in
   relation to glucose homeostasis in rats. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 33, 686–689.
                                                                     Salai Guggal   237

43 Salai Guggal




    Boswellia serrata Roxb. ex Colebr.
    Family: Burseraceae


THE TREE AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

The tree grows wild in forests of hilly areas of central India. It has smooth, yellow or
ash coloured bark with alternate, imparipinnate leaves (Fig. 35) which are crowded at
the end of branches. Leaﬂets are sessile and opposite, in 8–15 pairs. Flowers are in
axillary racemes. The fruit is three-angled, splitting into three valves.
   Two varieties of the tree have been recognized:
      var. serrata with pubescent leaves.
      var. glabra with entirely glabrous leaves. (It is sometimes wrongly identiﬁed as B.
         glabra.)
   The gum is obtained by removing small patches of the bark from the tree trunk.
The resin from the stem, on drying, gets deposited along the sides of the bark after a
few days, and is collected from there. The gum is pooled at collection centres and is
sorted by hand into various qualities. The gum pieces are globular, club shaped,
stalactitic drops of pale yellow to brown, which may coagulate to form bigger lumps.
The gum has a typical odour. In trade the oleo-gum resin is known as Kundru, Dhup,
Loban, Indian olibanum or frankincense. Some times the gum of B. carterii Birdw.
imported from north Africa or Arabia is also supplied as Kundru.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

In Ayurveda the gum is considered anti-dysentric, anti-pyretic, and is used mainly in
rheumatism and convulsions, but also in various nervous diseases. It is an astringent
and anti-inﬂammatory agent when applied externally. It is not a constituent of impor-
tant Ayurvedic products. It is sometimes used as a substitute for guggal gum.
238 Salai Guggal




    Figure 35 Boswellia serrata twig.




THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Tranquillizing property
The non-phenolic fraction of the gum was tried on rats by Menon and Kar (1971).
   The animals showed a reduction in spontaneous motor activity and the closing
of eyelids. The rats became alert at the slightest disturbance but returned to a state of
sedation after a few minutes, showing a tranquillizing effect. The non-phenolic fraction
acted like morphine. It produced marked and long-lasting hypotensive activity in
anaesthetized dogs (Kar, 1977).
                                                                     Salai Guggal   239
As an anti-inﬂammatory agent
Pachnanda et al. (1980) administered gum to patients with musculoskeletal rheum-
atism, including rheumatoid arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis, and achieved good
results. Gupta et al. (1987) found that defatted alcohol extract was effective against
rheumatoid arthritis and related ailments such as osteoarthritis, juvenile rheumatoid
arthritis, soft tissue ﬁbrositis and spondylitis. The mechanism of action was similar
to the non-steroidal group of anti-arthritic drugs and it was free from gastric irrita-
tion and ulcerogenic activity. It improved the blood supply to the joints and restored
the integrity of vessels internally damaged or obliterated by spasms. Singh and Atal
(1986) also conﬁrmed that the alcoholic extract of gum exhibited a marked anti-
inﬂammatory activity in oedema in rats without any ulcerogenic effect. Singh et al.
(1992) showed that the active constituent, boswellic acid, had a novel mode of action
and formed a new category of anti-inﬂammatory drug. Duwiejua et al. (1993) observed
the anti-inﬂammatory effects. Singh et al. (1996) noted on further studies that boswellic
acid elicited inhibitory action on vascular permeability. It did not have an analgesic
or ulcerogenic effect but had good anti-pyretic activity. Ammon et al. (1992, 1993)
found boswellic acid a potent inhibitor of prostaglandin. It inhibited the forma-
tion of 5-lipxygenase products in polymorphonuclear neutrophils in a dose related
manner.

Immunomodulator activity
Sharma et al. (1988, 1996) studied the effect of boswellic acid on cell-mediated and
humoral components of the immune system and its immunotoxicological potential.
It enhanced the phagocytic function of the adherent macrophages. Prolonged oral
administration increased body weight, total leucocyte count and humoral antibody
titres in rats. It was not cytotoxic and did not have immunosuppression effects. Knaus
and Wagner (1996) found that β-boswellic acid, the major constituent of resin, pos-
sessed anti-complementry activity in the classical and alternative pathways through
their effects on complement-dependent immunohaemolysis of erythrocytes. A special
extract of gum resin was tried on joint swelling, pain, erythrocyte sedimentation rate
and stiffness. It was found effective in rheumatoid arthritis. Etzel (1996) concluded
that it is not only a good analgesic but a disease modifying agent which could replace
other such products.
   A clinical trial of a herbomineral compound containing Withania, Boswellia, tur-
meric and zinc was carried out on osteoarthritis patients by Kulkarni et al. (1991). It
produced a signiﬁcant drop in the severity of pain and disability score. Another form
of the above preparation without zinc, when tried for 3 months, relieved pain, decreased
morning sickness, and brought about a drop in erythrocyte sedimentation. Radiologi-
cal assessment did not show any signiﬁcant changes (Kulkarni et al. 1992).

In leukaemia
Shao et al. (1998) observed the inhibitory activity of boswellic acids against human
leukaemia HL-60 cells in culture. It inhibited the synthesis of DNA, RNA and proteins
in human leukaemia in a dose-dependent manner.
240 Salai Guggal
In hyperlipidaemia
It decreased serum cholesterol and triglycerides (Zutshi et al. 1986).

Review
Gupta et al. (1987) gave an account of gum chemistry and pharmacology.

Chemical studies
Mainly terpenoids, boswellic acid and other related pentacyclic triterpenic acids have
been reported.

Toxicological studies
The gum extract is safe, well tolerated and can be used in long-term therapy (Etzel,
1996).

References
Ammon, H.P.T., Safayhi, H., Mack, T., Sabieraj, J. Potent inhibitors of prostaglandin and/or
  leucotriene synthesis from turmeric and Salai Guggal. International Seminar-Traditional Medi-
  cine, Calcutta, 7–9 November 1992.
Ammon, H.P.T., Safayhi, H., Mack, T., Sabieraj, J. (1993) Mechanism of antiinﬂammatory
  actions of curcumin and boswellic acids. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 38, 113–119.
Duwiejua, M., Zeitlin, I.J., Waterman, P.G., Chapman, J., Mahnago, G.J., Provan, G.J. (1993)
  Antiinﬂammatory activity of resin from some species of plant family Burseraceae. Planta
  Medica, 59, 12–16.
Etzel, R. (1996) Special extract of Boswellia serrata (H-15) in the treatment of rheumatoid
  arthritis. Phytomedicine, 3, 91–94.
Gupta, V.N., Yadav, D.S., Atal, C.K. (1987) Chemistry and Pharmacology of gum resin of
  Boswellia serrata (Salai Guggal). Indian Drugs, 24, 221–223.
Kar, A. (1977) Effect of the gum resin of Boswellia serrata Roxb. on the cardiovascular system
  and isolated tissues. Indian Drugs and Pharmaceutical Industry, 12, 17–20.
Knaus, U., Wagner, H. (1996) Effects of boswellic acid of Boswellia serrata and the other
  triterpenic acids on the complement system. Phytomedicine, 3, 77–81.
Kulkarni, R.R., Patki, P.S., Jog, V.P., Gandage, S.G., Patwardhan, B. (1991) Treatment of
  osteoarthritis with a herbomineral formulation: a double blind, placebo-controlled, cross-
  over study. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 33, 91–95.
Kulkarni, R.R., Patki, P.S., Jog, V.P., Gandage, S.G., Patwardhan, B. (1992) Efﬁcacy of an
  Ayurvedic formulation in rheumatoid arthritis: A double blind placebo controlled cross over
  study. Indian Journal of Pharmacology, 24, 98–101.
Menon, M.K., Kar, A. (1971) Analgesic and psychopharmacological effects of gum resin of
  B. serrata. Planta Medica, 19, 333–341.
Pachnanda, V.K., Shashi Kant, Deedar Singh, Singh, G.B., Gupta, O.P., Atal, C.K. (1980)
  Clinical evaluation of Salai guggal in patients of arthritis. XIII Annual Conference of Indian
  Pharmacological Society, Chandigarh, 26 December 1994.
Shao Yu, Ho, VhiTang, Chin CheeKok, Badmaev, V., Ma Wei, Huang MouTuan (1998)
  Inhibitory activity of boswellic acids from Boswellia serrata against human leukemia HL-60
  cells in culture. Planta Medica, 64, 328–331.
                                                                             Salai Guggal     241
Sharma, M.L., Kharjuria, A., Kaul, A., Singh, S., Singh, G.B., Atal, C.K. (1988) Effect of Salai
   guggal ex Boswellia serrata on cellular and humoral immune responses and leucocyte migra-
   tion. Agents and Actions, 24, 161–164.
Sharma, M.L., Kaul, A. Khajuria, A., Singh, S., Singh, G.B. (1996) Immunomodulatory activity
   of boswellic acids (pentacyclic triterpene acids) from Boswellia serrata. Phytotherapy Research,
   10, 107–112.
Singh, G.B., Atal, C.K. (1986) Pharmacology of an extract of Salai Guggal ex-Boswellia serrata,
   a new non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory agent. Agents Actions, 18, 407– 412.
Singh, G.B., Surjeet Singh, Sarang Bani (1996) Anti-inﬂammatory actions of boswellic acids.
   Phytomedicine, 3, 81–85.
Singh, G.B., Surjeet Singh, Sarang Bani., Kaul, A. (1992) Boswellic acid: a new class of anti-
   inﬂammatory drugs with a novel mode of action. International Seminar-Traditional Medicine-
   Calcutta, India, 7–9 November 1992, 81–82.
Zutshi, U., Rao, P.G., Ravi, S., Singh, G.B., Surjeet Singh, Atal, C.K. (1986) Mechansim of
   cholesterol lowering effects of Salai guggal ex Boswellia serrata Roxb. Indian Journal of
   Pharmacology, 18, 182–183.
242 Salep

44 Salep




    Orchis latifolia L.
    Syn: Dactylorhiza hatagirea
    Family: Orchidaceae


THE PLANTS AND THEIR DISTRIBUTION

The source of salep is tubers of many species of orchids, such as Orchis latifolia L., O.
laxiﬂora Lam., O. maculata, O. militaris L., O. mario L., O. mascula L., O. pyramidalis L.,
O. sambucina and O. simia L. In Russia, salep is obtained from Orchis spp., Gymnadenia
spp. (Habenaria), Anacamptis spp. and Platanthera spp.
    In Turkey and Iran, these tubers have been collected for many centuries and exported
under the Arabic name Sahlep, which changed to salep in Europe and to Salem in India.
Salep has been mentioned in Greek and Roman mythology as a talisman under the
name Satyrion. In western Asian and adjoining European countries, it is very much
valued as a tonic, restorative and aphrodisiac. Gypsies call the root Karengro and use it
as an aphrodisiac and as love amulet. It is highly nutritious. It has a sweetish taste
and unpleasant smell. Salep is said to be hot, humid as per the concept of traditional
healers and so is well esteemed for impotency and nervous disorders in the Unani-
Tibb (Greco-Arabic system of medicine) where the following varieties of tuber have
been recognized: Salam punja if palm-like, Salam lahsunia if garlic-like, Salam mishri
if translucent and globular like sugar candy and Salam Badshah (Badshah is emperor) if
big or round.
    The Sanskrit name of salep is probably munjatak (Trivedi et al. 1974) but this name
is not used now. In India, salep is broadly classiﬁed into salem panja – when it is like
the palm of a hand and salem mishri – when globular or oval. It is obtained from many
orchids but the common sources are: O. latifolia., O. mascula, Eulophia hormusjii Duthie
E. campestris Wall., E nuda Lindll, Habenaria commelinifolia Wall. Ex Lindl., Cymbidium
aloifolium, and Satyrium nepalensis (Puri, 1970). E. hormusjii is of interest because it is a
tuberous orchid which grows in the plains of Punjab and at one time was identiﬁed as
Salam Lahori (after Lahore which is in Pakistan now, earlier it was the capital of united
Punjab). In O. latifolia, the tuber may be palmate or two dichotomously branched
tubers joined together. In E. camapestris, the tuber is irregularly branched and often
lobed, while in E. nuda it is spherical and smooth, like potato. O. latifolia grows
in the Himalayas, while the other Orchis spp and Salam Badshah (Allium macleanii) are
imported to India from Iran and Afghanistan.
                                                                                  Salep 243




    Figure 36 Orchis latifolia A herb, B dry root, C Salep, commercial samples.




   O. latifolia (Fig. 36A) grows at a height of 3,000–3,500 m in the western Himala-
yas. It is a small herb, 5–15 cm long, with lanceolate or linear oblong leaves and a
spike about 5 cm long with purple ﬂowers. The bracts are longer than the ﬂowers. In
Kashmir, the herb is known as Narmada, (male female) and in the central Himalayas
Hathjori (like hand). The root (Fig. 36B) is like aconites. The daughter tuber origi-
nates from the side of the mother tuber and both the tubers become slightly bifurcated
at the tapering ends so they look like legs. When fresh these tubers may form a human
conﬁguration, very much like that of ginseng tubers.
   When the plants mature and the ﬂowers dry, the roots are removed from the soil.
In commercial centres, the tubers are blanched in saline boiling water. When soft
they are peeled by macerating by hand and dried again. This treatment gelatinizes
the starch and gives a waxy, horny texture to the tubers (Puri, 1971a). In commerce
244 Salep
(Fig. 34C) salam mishri tubers are round to oval, dirty white to pale yellow, slightly
wrinkled or smooth, waxy, hard, whereas tubers of salam panja are like a human hand,
1–3 cm long, about 0.5 cm thick and joined at the top. Sometimes potato starch
mixed with acacia gum is made into the shape of salep and boiled in water to
gelatinize the starch. When dry these fake tubers, acquire the texture and shape of the
genuine drug and are used as an adulterant. Keeping this adulteration in mind, Puri
(1971a) provided the pharmacognostic characters of O. latifolia and Eulophia hormuji
(Puri, 1971b) to differentiate genuine tubers from the adulterants.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

As a nutrient
The ﬁne powder of the root contains up to 48 per cent mucilage, which becomes thick
and mucilaginous when boiled in milk, so that one teaspoon of salep in a cup of milk
forms a nutritious drink. It is useful for nervous debility, mental and physical exhaus-
tion, hemiplegia and for paralytic affections. It helps weak digestion which is due to
the sluggishness of the digestive system, loose motions and hyperacidity.
   In mediaeval times, the sailors used to have 2 teaspoons of salep daily during sea
voyages, boiled in a glass of water and sweetened. It kept their bodies strong and
active. It was also added to sherbet.

For sexual inadequacy
It is an ingredient of many aphrodisiac preparations used for increasing the
quantity, quality and retention time of semen in the body. A recipe is made by
pulverizing 100 g Orchis, and 200 g almond kernel. It is used by both sexes, tak-
ing 10 g everyday on an empty stomach in the morning and before sleep in the
evening.

For diabetes
Pulverize 100 g each of Orchis, Chlorophytum, Curculigo and use half a teaspoon twice
daily in the morning on an empty stomach and before retiring in the evening. These
herbs may not act directly on sugar metabolism but will provide energy to the body
due to the loss of sugar absorption.

For leucorrhoea
Make a ﬁne powder of 50 g each of Orchis, Asparagus, Chlorophytum, Curculigo and
Withania. When one teaspoon is used before retiring to bed, there is symptomatic
relief of backache due to leucorrhoea. It can be used after childbirth.

For general lethargy (ﬁbromyalgia)
Salep can be used for any type of body weakness, apathy towards work and sleep,
incapability of doing physical work and exercise, body ache, muscular pains, etc. Make
                                                                          Salep 245
a ﬁne powder of equal quantities of Orchis and long pepper, take 5 g of it with goat’s
milk, twice daily.

To allay irritation in gastro-intestinal canal
A mucilage is prepared and used by shaking one part of powdered salep with 10 parts
of cold water until dispersed. Add 90 parts of boiling water to it and shake the whole
mass. Drink it like sherbet.

Ayurvedic preparations

Vidyriadi churn

Method Mix 50 g each of ﬁnely powdered Pueraria, Orchis, Withania, Pedalium,
Chlorophytum, and Anacyclus.

Dose One teaspoon twice daily with milk.

Indications It makes the body strong. It helps semen retention, premature ejacula-
tion, nocturnal emission and spermatorrhoea.
   A slight variation of this preparation is Rativallabh churn, used for the same pur-
pose. (Note: Rativallabh Churn signiﬁcantly differs from Rativallabh Pak.)

Salam pak

Method Take 400 g Orchis, 200 g pistachio, 200 g almond, 100 g Buchanania latifolia
kernel, 100 g walnut, 100 g Chlorophytum, 50 g Pedalium and 20 g each of Withania,
Hygrophila, Asparagus, Pistacia lentiscus oleo-gum resin, Mucuna seed without its seed
coat, 10 g each of saffron, nutmeg, clove, mace, Piper cubeba, bamboo manna, cinna-
mon, Cydonia vulgaris seed, 1250 g sugar and 400 g ghee. Grind the salep separately
into a ﬁne powder and roast it with a low heat with a small amount of ghee until the
salep turns light brown in colour. Make a paste of the remaining dry fruits and fry
them in the remaining ghee. Make a sugar syrup and add it to the above cooked salep,
dry fruits, herbs and spices. Make candy balls of 20 g each.

Dose 10–20 g as per the digestive power, twice daily, chew thoroughly and drink
milk afterwards.

Use It is used as a winter tonic for all types of sexual inadequacy, mental and
physical weaknesses, laziness and low digestion.

Salam pak forte
For an additional tonic effect and for increasing disease resistance, immunity and
mental power, particularly for middle-aged patients, add to Salam Pak, 10 g Ras sindur
(red sulphide of mercury), 20 g mica compound and 20 g tin compound before
making the candy balls. The dose of Salam Pak Forte should be 10 g or less, compared
246 Salep
with the original preparation is 20 g and it should be used for 60 days, in winter
only.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

As a sex tonic
Ageel et al. (1994) studied the effect of ethanol extract of O. maculata tuber on the
sexual behaviour of male rats using a number of tests including penile erection,
homosexual mounting, stretching, yawning, aggressiveness, copulatory behaviour and
orientational activities. The extract at a dose of 500 mg/kg enhanced sexual arousal in
male rats. It produced a signiﬁcant increase in all the parameters.
   Khan and Rehman (1994) tried a polyherbal preparation, with Orchis as the main
ingredient, to study the sexual behaviour of adult male albino rats, at a dose of 500
mg/100 g weight, for ﬁve days. When the treated male rats were exposed to female
rats there was an improvement in their sexual functions.

Chemical studies
It contains 48 per cent mucilage, 2.7 per cent starch, nitrogenous substances (5 per
cent) and a bitter glucosidic substance (Nadkarni, 1954).

References
Ageel, A.M., Islam, M.W., Ginawi, O.T., Al Yahya, M.A. (1994) Evaluation of the aphro-
  disiac activity of the Litsea chinensis (Lauraceae) and Orchis maculata (Orchidaceae) extracts in
  rats. Phytotherapy Research, 8, 103–105.
Khan, N.A., Rahman, S.Z. The effect of Majoon Salab on male sexual function. Proceedings
  National Seminar on Unani Medicine, Hyderabad (India), 22–24 July 1994.
Nadkarni, K.M. Indian Materia Medica, Vol I. Popular Prakashan, Bombay 1954.
Puri, H.S. (1970) Salep: The drug from orchids. American Orchid Society Bulletin. 39, 723.
Puri, H.S. (1971a) Pharmacognostic investigations on the root of Orchis latifolia. Indian Drugs,
  8, 15–18.
Puri, H.S. (1971b) Macro- and micromorphology of the tuber of Eulophia hormusjii Duthie.
  American Orchid Society Bulletin, 40, 704–706.
Trivedi, V.P., Dixit, R.S., Lal, V.K., Joshi, P. (1974) Clues for identiﬁcation of a controversial
  drug (Mumjataka) from ancient literature. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, 9, 56– 63.
                                                                      Semal Musli   247

45 Semal Musli




    Bombax ceiba L.
    Syn: B. malabaricum DC.
    Salmalia malabarica (DC) Schott. & Endl.
    Family: Bombacaceae


THE TREE AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is a tall deciduous tree, common up to 1,500 m throughout warmer parts of India.
It has a buttressed trunk, with grey bark and sharp conical prickles on the young
stem. The branches are in whorls. Leaves (Fig. 37A) are large with 5–7 lanceolate
leaﬂets, each 10–20 cm long. Flowers (Fig. 37C) are crimson red, 10–15 cm in dia-
meter, appearing before the new leaves. Capsules are dirty brown and when open the
seeds ﬂoat on the air with the help of pappus.
   In Ayurveda it is mainly the gum, known as mochrus, and the young root called
semal musli (Fig. 37B) which are used in medicine. Mochrus consists of lustrous brown-
red particles. Semal musli is obtained from young roots and the adjoining stem pieces
of 1–2 year old trees. It is 5 cm or so thick, dull brick-red in colour with circular
striation and a papery covering. There is no characteristic smell but it has a mucilagin-
ous taste.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

The gum is astringent, constipating, a nutrient, anabolic, a blood puriﬁer and strength-
ens the vital ﬂuid and other vital systems. It is very effective for gastroenteritis and
loose motions. It coagulates the blood and so helps stem bleeding, particularly exces-
sive bleeding during menstruation and pulmonary tuberculosis. It prevents threatened
miscarriage. It is prescribed with ginger, dry fruits, etc. in the form of candies, to
ladies after childbirth.
   Semal musli is a geriatric tonic, nutrient, Rasayana, with a stimulating action on the
generative organs. As an aphrodisiac 12 g of root powder with 12 g sugar and 12 ml
of water is taken twice daily.
248 Semal Musli




Figure 37 Bombax ceiba A twig, B ﬂower, C root piece.




Ayurvedic preparation

A nutritive tonic

Method Mix ﬁne powders of 200 g mochrus, 300 g poppy seed, 400 g Abroma augusta
dry leaves, 300 g Mucuna, without its seed coat, 500 g Chlorophytum, 400 g Asparagus
and 300 g Pistacia lentiscus gum.

Dose 650–1,000 mg, twice daily with water.

Use   In female sexual debility.
                                                                          Semal Musli    249
Chemical studies
The gum mainly consists of catechutannic acid. The root bark has various naphthalene
derivatives related to gossypol (Thakur et al. 1989).

Reference
Thakur, R.S., Puri, H.S., Akhtar Hussain Major Medicinal Plants of India. Central Institute of
  Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Lucknow India 1989.
250 Shankhpushpi

46 Shankhpushpi




    Convolvulus pluricaulis Choice
    Family: Convolvulaceae


THE PLANTS AND THEIR DISTRIBUTION

According to Ayurveda, it is a small annual herb, with conch shell-like ﬂowers (shankh
is conch and pushp ﬂower). Three varieties of shankhpushpi, with white, red or blue-
coloured ﬂowers, are recognized but the variety with white ﬂowers (C. pluricaulis) is
considered genuine. It is a spreading climber, with a woody stem, 10–60 cm long
branches with trichomes, leaves up to 4 cm long and white or pink ﬂowers. It grows
during the rainy season in the hotter parts of India. The other herbs (Upadhye and
Kumbhojkar, 1993) which are used as shankhpushpi are:
   Convolvulus arvensis L. (Fig. 38A)
   C. microphyllus Sieb. ex Spreng.
   Evolvulus alsinoides L. (Fig. 38B)
   Clitoria ternatea L.
   Conscorea decussata Schult.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

According to the ancient Indian author Vagbhatta, it is the best of the three herbs in
the Medha Rasayana group used as a brain tonic. It has a cooling effect on the brain.
The herb increases the vital ﬂuid; it is hot in effect, so is a digestive, appetizer and
carminative. It cures skin diseases and is an antidote to poisons. The other uses of this
herb are:

As a mental tonic
The herb is considered good for the brain, it is said to sharpen memory, intellect,
brain power, cure mental diseases and impart deep sleep. It is used as follows:
  1. In epilepsy and cerebral ischaemia, use one teaspoon of juice twice a day.
  2. The ﬁne powder of the whole herb, one teaspoon twice daily with milk, is a
mental tonic for students and intellectuals.
  3. In high fevers, when mental balance is lost, one teaspoon of the powder with
water is given 3– 4 times in a day.
                                                                    Shankhpushpi 251




    Figure 38 Convolvuls arvensis A herb, B Evolvulus alsinoides.



   4. In enuresis (bed wetting) half a teaspoon of powder of the herb with honey,
followed by milk or water is given for 1–2 months.
   5. For nervous debility and memory loss, an infusion of one part of the herb in 40
parts water, in a dose of 50–100 ml is used with cumin and milk.

For diabetes
One teaspoon of shankhpushpi mixed with half teaspoon of black pepper is adminis-
tered twice daily.
252 Shankhpushpi
For high blood pressure
Make a decoction by boiling two teaspoons of the herb in 400 ml of water until
reduced to 100 ml. Filter it. Drink this decoction for 2–3 days along with one
teaspoon of dry powder of the herb. Continue this treatment for 1–2 weeks until the
blood pressure is normal.

Ayurvedic preparations

Shankhpushpi syrup

Method Soak 125 g Convolvulus and 25 g Centella or Bacopa in 3 litres of water until
reduced to 2.5 litres, macerate the herbs in water and ﬁlter to remove water insoluble
matter. In the ﬁltrate dissolve sugar (5 kg) and citric acid (1 g).

Dose 1–2 teaspoonful

Use As a mental tonic, it stimulates the nervous system and enhances memory. It
relieves headaches due to mental exertion. It helps other nervous diseases like epilepsy,
convulsions and hysteria.

Shankhpushpi pills

Method Take 1,000 ml of Convolvulus and Withania juice, and 100 g of ﬁne powdered
Centella, Glycyrrhiza, Tinospora, Asparagus, Eclipta, and Acorus calamus. Boil the juices
until reduced to half, ﬁlter and concentrate to obtain 250 ml of ﬂuid. Add to this ﬁne
powders of the rest of herbs, mix thoroughly and make pills of 125 mg each.

Dose Adults 2 pills, children 1 pill with milk, for 4–5 months.

Uses For increasing mental powers and treating various nervous diseases like insomnia,
depression and high blood pressure.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

In anxiety neurosis
Prasad et al. (1974) tried it for experimental stress. The herb had effect on various
glands through neurohumours, particularly acetylcholine. Mudgal et al. (1977) studied
neurohumoral changes in the body under the inﬂuence of this herb. Mudgal and
Udupa (1977b) noted that the herb had a distinct psychotropic effect, which was
anti-anxiety in its nature, and resulted in improved mental function (Singh and
Mehta, 1977). In other experiments, the herb was found to induce a feeling of
well-being, good sleep, relief from anxiety, nervousness, palpitation and increases in
memory spasm. It caused a reduction in neuroticism and mental fatigue. The herb
showed a signiﬁcant barbiturate hypnosis potentiation effect, a rise in the levels of
                                                                      Shankhpushpi 253
5-hydroxytryptamine, histamine, and a reduction in the levels of acetylcholine and
catecholamine in all brain tissue (Singh et al. 1977a, b). Because of these activities,
the herb was used before anaesthesia (Deshpande and Lalta Prasad, 1978). Shukla
(1981) recommended it as an anti-anxiety agent. Sinha et al. (1989) put forth the
view that the memory potentiation and learning effect of the herb may be due to
protein synthesis. The herbs collected during spring showed the maximum hypnosis
potentiating activity (Mishra et al. 1995).

Hypotensive effect
Mudgal et al. (1972), Mudgal and Udupa (1977a) observed maximum activity in the
leaves.

In Fabry’s disease
Goldman et al. (1996) postulated that the nortropane alkaloid isolated from this herb
was a glycosidase inhibitor and may be of help in Fabry’s disease, which is caused by
lack of α-galactosidase activity.

Anti-ulcerogenic effect
Purohit et al. (1996) observed that the alcoholic extract of the whole plant of E.
alsinoides signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of ulcers.

In schizophrenia
An indigenous psychotropic preparation made from the extracts of E. alsinoides, Centella,
Withania, Glycyrrhiza, Saussurea, calamus, Rauvolﬁa and Myristica, in a dose of 100 mg
was tried on untreated schizophrenia patients. It showed improvement in 50 per cent
cases without side effects (Parikh et al. 1984). In patients of depressive illness, a dose
of 25 ml Shankhpushpi syrup showed a positive anti-depressant effect (Kushwaha and
Sharma, 1992). It also helped in catatonia (Purohit et al. 1996).

Intercation with phenytoin
A polyherbal Ayurvedic preparation containing Convolvulus pluricaulis, Centella asiatica,
Nepeta hindostana, N. elliptica, Nardostachys jatamansi and Onosma bracteatum reduced the
anti-epileptic activity of phenytoin (Dandekar et al. 1992).

Chemical studies
Tropane alkaloids like pseudotropine, polyhydroxy tropanes, tropinone and pyrrolidine
have been isolated (Todd et al. 1995).

Toxicological studies
Horses exhibited weight loss, colic and vascular sclerosis of the small intestine when
grazed on C. arvensis (Todd et al. 1995).
254 Shankhpushpi
References
Dandekar, U.P., Chandra, R.S., Dalvi, S.S., Joshi, M.V., Gokhale, P.C., Sharma, A.V., Shah,
   P.U., Kshirsagar, N.A. (1992) Analysis of a clinically important interaction between phenytoin
   and Shankhpushpi, an Ayurvedic preparation. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 35, 285–288.
Deshpande, P.S., Lalta Prasad (1978) Role of indigenous drugs before anaesthesia. Journal of
   Research in Indian Medicine, Yoga and Homoeopathy, 13, 9–12.
Goldman, A., Message, B., Tepfer, D., Molyneux, R.J., Duclos, O., Boyer, F.D., Pan, Y.T.,
   Elbein, A.D. (1996) Biological activities of the nortropane alkaloid, calystegine B2, and
   analogs: structure–function relationships. Journal of Natural Products, 59, 1137–1142.
Kushwaha, H.K., Sharma, K.P. (1992) Clinical evaluation of Shankhpushpi syrup in the
   mangement of depressive illness. Sachitra Ayurveda, 45, 45–50.
Mishra, A.S., Verma, J., Kumari, N. (1995) Studies on medicinal properties of Convolvulus
   pluricaulis and Boerhaavia diffusa. Biojournal, 61, 31–36.
Mudgal, V., Rai, V., Singh, R.H., Udupa, K.N. (1977) Neurohumoral changes under the
   inﬂuence of Shankhpushpi. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, Yoga and Homoeopathy, 12,
   58–61.
Mudgal, V., Srivastava, D.N., Singh, R.H., Udupa, K.N. (1972) Hypotensive action of
   Convolvulus pluricaulis. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, Yoga and Homoeopathy, 7, 74–77.
Mudgal, V., Udupa, K.N. (1977a) Hypotensive activity with different doses of extracts of
   various parts of Convolvulus microphyllus (Shankhpushpai). Journal of Research in Indian Medi-
   cine, Yoga and Homoeopathy, 12, 124–126.
Mudgal, V., Udupa, K.N. (1977b) Anti-convulsive action of Shankhpushpi. Journal of Research
   in Indian Medicine, Yoga and Homoeopathy, 12, 127–129.
Parikh, M.D., Pradhan, P.V., Shah, L.P., Bagadia, V.N. (1984) Evaluation of indigenous
   psychotropic drugs – a preliminary study. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 5,
   12–17.
Prasad, G.C., Gupta, R.C., Srivastava, D.N., Tandon, A.K., Wahi. R.S., Udupa, K.N. (1974)
   Effect of Shankhpushpi on experimental stress. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, 9:
   19–27.
Purohit, M.G., Shanthaveerappa, B.K., Shrishailappa, B., Swamy, H.K.S. (1996) Antiulcer and
   anticatatonic activity of alcoholic extract of Evolvulus alsinoides (Convolvulaceae). Indian Journal
   of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 58, 110–112.
Shukla, S.P. (1981) Anti-anxiety agents of plant origin. Probe, 20, 201–208.
Singh, R.H., Agrawal, V.K., Mehta, A.K. (1977a) Studies on the effect of Medhya Rasayana
   drug, Shankhpushpi (Convolvulus pluricaulis). Part III. Pharmacological studies. Journal of
   Research in Indian Medicine, Yoga and Homoeopathy, 12, 48–52.
Singh, R.H., Mehta, A.K. (1977) Studies on psychotropic effect of the Medhya Rasayana drug,
   Shankhpushpi (Convolvulus pluricaulis). Part I. Clinical Studies. Journal of Research in Indian
   Medicine, Yoga and Homoeopathy, 12, 18–25.
Singh, R.H., Mehta, A.K., Sarkar, F.H., Udupa, K.N. (1977b) Studies on psychotropic effects
   of the Medhya Rasayana drug, Shankhpushpi (Convolvulus pluricaulis Chois.). Part II. Experi-
   mental Studies. Journal for Research in Indian Medicine, Yoga and Homoeopathy, 12, 42– 47.
Sinha, S.N., Dixit, V.P., Madnawat, A.V.S., Sharma, O.P. (1989) The possible potentiation
   of cognitive processing on administration of Convolvulus microphyllus in rats. Indian Medicine,
   1, 1–6.
Todd, F.G., Stermitz, F.R., Schultheis, P., Knight, A.P., Traub-Dargatz, J. (1995) Tropane
   alkaloids and toxicity of Convolvulus arvensis. Phytochemistry, 39, 301–303.
Upadhye, A.S., Kumbhojkar, M.S. (1993) Studies on the Ayurvedic drug Shankhpushpi from
   western Maharashtra: Medico-botanical aspect. Bulletin of Medico-Ethnobotanical Research, 14,
   64–69.
                                                                         Shatawari 255

47 Shatawari




    Asparagus racemosus Willd.
    (Family: Liliaceae)

The herb in some of the earlier Indian ﬂoras has been wrongly identiﬁed as A.
ofﬁcinalis.


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is a small shrub or a woody climber and grows in all parts of India at a low altitude
in the shade and in tropical climates. The rootstock has fascicled tuberous roots.
Branches are angular, leaves (Fig. 39A) reduced to spinescent scales and 0.4–0.6 mm
long. Flowers are white, solitary, clustered in a raceme. The fruit is a subglobose berry
with 1–6 smooth black seeds.
   The roots of A. adscendens Roxb. (Fig. 39D) and A. gonoclados Baker (Fig. 39E) are
also known as shatawari. A. sarmentosus Willd. has a bigger root so is called mahashatwari
or big shatawari. A. ﬁlicinus Ham. which grows in the temperate Himalayas and has a
bunch of tuberous roots is sometimes used as shatawari but is a source of another
Ayurvedic root, safed musli.
   The root is dried after harvesting and may be boiled, peeled and cut into pieces.
The root is very rich in mucilage and on pulverizing, the powder forms hard lumps by
absorbing moisture.
   In trade there are two varieties, one is pale brown, slightly resinous and said to
come from Nepal (Fig. 39B) whilst the other is dirty white, horny, spongy and probably
from south India (Fig. 39C). The Ayurvedic physicians prefer the root from Nepal as
it is said to be more effective.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

According to Ayurveda, shatawari is heavy, cold, bitter, nutritive; it relieves vata and
pitta and is a Rasayana. In pitta 5 g of this root with honey and ghee is given twice
daily. It helps fatigue, insomnia, weakness, laziness and in urinogenital disorders. In
vata take an equal quantity of Asparagus and long pepper and use 5 g with honey twice
daily.
   In kapha use Shatawari pak – a compound preparation.
256 Shatawari




    Figure 39 Asparagus racemosus A twig, B root from Nepal, C root from south India,
              A. adscendens: D twig, E A. gonoclados: twig.




   Shatawari is said to help intelligence and weak eyesight. It is a blood puriﬁer and an
antiinﬂammatory agent. It is an important ingredient of many Ayurvedic formula-
tions, mainly used for proper development of the body to make it more energetic. The
major uses of shatawari are:

During pregnancy
It is used for breast development, proper embryonic growth and to rid genital organs
of diseases. In the ﬁrst eight months of pregnancy, it is prescribed in a powder form
orally, but during the ninth month a swab of cotton dipped in oil made from Asparagus
is inserted into the vagina daily before sleep. It acts as a lubricant, makes vaginal muscles
strong and elastic, which helps a painless delivery.
                                                                        Shatawari 257
For leucorrhoea
Mix 5–10 g powdered Asparagus with equal amount of ghee, swallow it and drink
sweet, warm milk afterwards. Continue this treatment twice daily for 40 days.

As a galactagogue
Five to ten gram of Asparagus powder followed by warm milk is recommended to
pregnant ladies and to lactating mothers during the lactation period.

For dry coughs
For both infants and mothers, take equal quantities of powdered Asparagus, Adhatoda
leaves and sugar. Before use, boil 10 g of this mixture in 200 ml of water and when
the water is reduced to half, ﬁlter to remove insoluble matter. Boil the decoction
further until reduced to one-fourth (50 ml). For mothers the dose is 2–3 teaspoon of
the decoction, and for infant 3– 4 drops, three to four times a day.

For throat problems
Pulverize equal quantities of the roots of Asapargus, Acorus calamus and Sida cordifolia.
Use 5 g of this powder, 2–3 times a day.

Ayurvedic preparations

A galactagogue
Each capsule contains extracts of 200 mg Asparagus, 100 mg Withania, 50 mg
Glycyrrhiza, 50 mg Trigonella and 20 mg garlic.

Dose One capsule three times a day.

Use It develops breasts (Sholapurkar, 1986). After childbirth it stimulates lactation
and increases the milk yield.

Shatawari Pak

Ingredients 100 g each of Sida cordifolia, Asparagus and Cassia tora; clove, cardamom,
nutmeg, mace, raisins, 200 g almond, 1 kg sugar made into thick syrup, 900 g milk
solid matter (condensed milk) and 450 g ghee.

Method Make a ﬁne powder of the ﬁrst three ingredients. Separately roast the con-
densed milk in ghee until brown in colour, add the sugar syrup and heat some more to
further dry the mixture. When still hot add the powdered herbs, spices and chopped
dry fruits. Stir the whole mass for some time. When still warm, make candy balls of
20–25 g each.

Dose As per digestive power, 20–25 g in the morning with milk.
258 Shatawari
Use It makes both male and female bodies strong. This preparation increases the
bioavailability of shatwari to the patients.

Shatawari ghrit

Ingredients 400 ml Shatawari juice, 400 ml milk, 200 g ghee, Astvarga (eight herbs
used together, see Chavanprasha under amalaki for their names), black grapes, Uraria
picta, Desmodium gangeticum, Glycyrrhiza, Pueraria tuberosa and Pterocarpus santalinus, all
in equal quantities. (Note: If Asparagus juice is not available then steep 400 g of dry
Asparagus powder in 800 ml of water and keep for 24 hours. Macerate the root in
water and pass through muslin – this ﬁltrate is equivalent to juice of Asparagus.)

Method Grind the herbs, make a thick paste of these with juice, add 25 g each of
sugar and honey. Cook all the herbs in milk and ghee until all water evaporates and
only fatty matter is left. On cooling, mix the remaining sugar and honey.

Dose 1–2 teaspoon with milk in the evening.

Uses It is an aphrodisiac and is beneﬁcial to the sexual systems of both males and
females. For males, it is spermatogenic, imparts strength, increases the retention time
of ejaculation and dissipates excess body heat. In females, it helps pain and inﬂammation
due to vaginal diseases. It regularises menstruation, helps dysmenorrhoea and conception.
According to an Ayurvedic concept, normal conception does not take place in some
women because of excessive body heat. This preparation helps conception by keeping
the sperm alive for longer due to its cooling effect.

Contraindications
Any activity which generates body heat, for example non-vegetarian or heavy food,
meals which are hot in nature, tobacco, sleeping during the day, excessive work, sexual
intercourse and exercise.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

In ulcers
Kishore et al. (1980) tried the root in the treatment of duodenal ulcers. There was
a deﬁnite cure in many cases. It also helped hyperacidity. When Dahanukar et al.
(1983) tried Asparagus with Terminalia chebula, they found that the preparation had a
cytoprotective effect on gastric mucosa in acute gastric ulceration. Duodenal ulcers
were prevented and the ulcer index was diminished. Dahanukar et al. (1986) found it
to have a protective effect against abdominal sepsis. When Singh and Singh (1986)
tried 12 g of root, in three divided doses, for six weeks on duodenal ulcer patients, it
relieved symptoms in most of the cases. Pande and Rajgopalan (1994) found the herb
effective in acid dyspepsia with or without ulcers. Bharti Mahashweri and Tewari
                                                                         Shatawari 259
(1996) prescribed 20 g of the root, in three divided doses, with milk for one month,
to duodenal ulcer patients. Some were suffering from hyperchlorohydria and
hyperacidity, whilst other had normal levels of gastric acidity. This treatment reduced
both total acid and free hydrochloric acid in all the patients.

Immunomodulating activity
Thatte et al. (1987) observed that pre-treating patients with Asparagus produced leucocy-
tosis, indicating the herb has an immunomodulating property. It brought immunother-
apeutic modiﬁcations of E. coli-induced abdominal sepsis. In another preparation Seena
et al. (1993) also noted that shatawari might be playing the role of an immunomodulator.

Galactagogue activity
Tennekoon et al. (1987) observed this activity in Asparagus falcatus. Vihan and Panwar
(1988) fed shatawari to lactating goats to study the galactagogue activity. There
was substantial increase in milk yield by a dose of 100g /kg/day of shatawar powder.
Khurana et al. (1996) gave a preparation containing Leptadenia, Nigella, fennel, Pueraria,
Glycyrrhiza, cumin and Asparagus to healthy buffaloes. It resulted in signiﬁcant in-
crease in milk yield. The effect was evident after 7 days, peaked on the 21st day and
was sustained for 35 days.

In male infertility
Samanta (1992) studied the modulation of male infertility by Asparagus, Astercantha
and Curculigo, by prescribing 8–10 g per day of a mixture of these herbs, divided into
three doses with milk and sugar, for three months to patients with oligospermia,
necrospermia and with less motile, unhealthy sperm. After one month of treatment
some changes in sperm morphology were observed. There was a considerable improve-
ment in the number and motility of the sperm, and immaturity was reduced. After
three months the sperm became normal in 80 per cent of patients.

In nausea and vomiting
Siddiqui and Hakim (1994) prescribed a 6 g mixture of Asparagus, Amomum subulatum,
Carum carvi and Glycyrrhiza extract in two equally divided doses for 6 weeks. Relief
from pain and burning in epigastrum, nausea and vomiting, and distension of abdo-
men was observed.

Anti-tumour activity
Sekin et al. (1994) mentioned that a polycyclic alkaloid from this root showed anti-
tumour activity on various tumour models in vitro. The same alkaloid also showed
anti-oxytocin activity in vitro (Sekin et al. 1995). Shao et al. (1996) observed that the
crude saponins from the root inhibited the growth of human leukaemia cells in culture,
in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Saponins were cytostatic at low concentration
but at higher levels the effect was cytocidal. Dhuley (1997) studied the effect of
A. racemosus on the function of macrophages obtained from mice treated with the
260 Shatawari
carcinogen ochratoxin A. The chemotactic activity of murine macrophages was signiﬁc-
antly decreased. The production of interlukin-1 and tumour necrosis factor was also
markedly reduced.

As a general tonic
Dhatriyadi yoga, a polyherbal preparation containing Emblica ofﬁcinalis, Asparagus and
Nardostachys grandiﬂora, when given to pregnant women, maintained optimal levels of
haemoglobin and serum protein. The preparation was quite safe and as effective as an
allopathic tonic (Dwivedi and Tewari, 1991).

Chemical studies
Asparagus contains steroidal sapogenins and steroidal glycosides.

References
Bharati Maheshwari, C.M., Tewari, S.K. (1996) A clinical study of Parinamasula and its
   treatment with Satavari (Asparagus racemosus Willd). Ancient Science of Life, 15, 162–165.
Dahanukar, S.A., Date, S.G., Karandikar, S.M. (1983) Cytoprotective effect of Terminalia
   chebula and Asparagus racemosus on gastric mucosa. Indian Drugs, 20, 442– 445.
Dahanukar, S.A., Thatte, U., Pai, N., More, P.B., Karandikar, S.M. (1986) Protective effect of
   Asparagus racemosus against-induced abdominal sepsis. Indian Drugs, 24, 124–128.
Dhuley, J.N. (1997) Effect of some Indian herbs on macrophage functions in ochratoxin A
   treated mice. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 58, 15–20.
Dwivedi, M., Tewari, P.V. (1991) Dhatriyadi Yoga in obstetrics-efﬁcacy and cost. Sachitra
   Ayurved, 44, 360–362.
Khurana, K.L., Balvinder Kumar, Khanna Sudhir, Maniya Anju. (1996) Effect of herbal
   galactagogue Payapro on milk yield in lactating buffaloes. International Journal of Animal
   Sciences, 11, 239–240.
Kishore, P., Pandey, P.N., Pandey, N.S., Dash, S. (1980) Treatment of duodenal ulcer with
   Asparagus racemosus Linn. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1, 409– 416.
Pande, T.N., Rajgopalan, S.S. (1994) Comparative study of three regimen containing Satavari
   on Amlapitta (acid dyspepsia with or without ulcer). Journal of Research in Ayurveda and
   Siddha, 15, 23–24.
Samanta, S.K. Modulation of male infertility by Ayurvedic drugs. International Seminar on
   Traditional Medicine, Calcutta, 7–9 November 1992.
Seena, K., Kuttan, G., Kuttan, R. (1993) Anticancer activity of selected plant extracts. Amala
   Research Bulletin, 13, 41– 45.
Sekine, T., Ikegami, F., Fukaswa, N., Kashimagi, Y., Aizawa, T., Fuji, Y., Ruangrungsi, N.,
   Murakoshi, I. (1995) Structure and related steriochemistry of a new polycyclic alkaloid
   asparagamine A showing anti-oxytocin activity, isolated from Asparagus racemosus. Perkin
   Transection 1, No 4, 391–393.
Sekine, T., Kukasawa, N., Kashiwagi, Y., Ruangrungsi, N., Murakoshi, I. (1994) Structure of
   asparagamine A, a novel polycyclic alkaloid from Asparagus racemosus. Chemical and Pharma-
   ceutical Bulletin, 42, 1360–1362.
Shao, Yu, Chin Cheekok, Ho Chi Tang, Ma Wei, Garrison, S.A., Hunag, Mou Tuan (1996) Anti
   tumour activity of the crude saponin obtained from Asparagus. Cancer Letter, 104, 31–36.
Sholapurkar, M.L. (1986) Lactare: for improving lactation. Indian Practitioner, 39, 1023–1926.
Siddiqui, M.Y., Hakim, M.H. (1994) Effect of Safoof-e-Satawar in acid peptic disorder (Hurqat-
   e-Meda). Hamdard Medicus, 37, 131–136.
                                                                            Shatawari 261
Singh, K.P., Singh, R.N. (1986) Clinical trial on Satavari (Asparagus racemosus Willd.) in
   duodenal ulcer disease. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 7, 91–100.
Tennekoon, K.H., Karunanayake, S.H., Mahindaratna, M.P.D. (1987) Evaluation of the
   galactagogue activity of Asparagus falcatus. Ceylone Journal of Medical Science, 30, 63–67.
Thatte, U., Chhabria, S., Karandikar, S.M., Dahanukar, S. (1987) Immunotherapeutic modiﬁca-
   tion of E. coli-induced abdominal sepsis and mortality in mice by Indian medicinal plants.
   Indian Drugs, 25, 95–97.
Vihan, V.S., Panwar, H.S. (1988) A note on galactogogue activity of Asparagus racemosus in
   lactating goats. Indian Journal of Animal Health, 27, 177–178.
262 Som Ras

48 Som Ras




In Rig-Veda, one of the oldest repositories of human knowledge, a long-cherished
substance of the vedic people, somras, the soma juice, is mentioned. Out of over 1,000
hymns in Rig-Veda, 120 are devoted exclusively to soma. It was a god-narcotic of
ancient Indians, which attained an exhalted place in the magico-religious ceremonies
of the Aryans (Schultes and Hofmann, 1992). For a long time, it was considered by
some to be a herb, the juice of which could lead to the attainment of superhuman
power. It was a divine bliss, which gave pleasure to human beings. It was a juice of
immortality, comparable to present day tonics, ambrosia, nectar, elixir, panacea or the
most recently introduced adaptogens, smart drugs or mood elevators. According to
Schultes and Hofmann (1992) when the culture changed from hunting to pastoralism
and agriculture, the use of soma died out and was forgotten long ago, so its source
became a mystery.
   The source of soma, on the basis of vague descriptions given in ancient texts, was
identiﬁed as a dark coloured, leaﬂess milky sap-containing creeper. These characteris-
tics resembled Periploca aphylla (Fig. 40A) and Sarcostemma brevistigma (Fig. 40C) of the
Asclepiadaceae family but these herbs lacked the physiological effects on the human
body ascribed to soma, so some authors thought that it might be from hallucinogenic
plants such as Cannabis or Peganum harmala, or a stimulant like Ephedra vulgaris
(Fig. 40B) (Puri, 1977).
   Wasson (1972), after an extensive ethnobotanical study of hallucinogenic fungi of
South America, considered soma to be the ﬂy agaric mushroom, Amanita muscaria (Fig.
40D), family Amanitaceae. This fungus is found in the western Himalayas at an
altitude of approximately 2,000 m in the rainy season on rotting organic matter.
When mature, the fructiﬁcation is crimson red in colour and looks like a beautiful
ﬂower. Insects are attracted to it by its colour and get killed on contact, due to the
fungus’s poisonous nature. The crimson umbrella has white scales and contains the
remains of dead insect bodies. When fully mature the fructiﬁcation is 7–20 cm in
diameter, the central stalk is 20–25 cm long with a broad bulbous base and has
numerous hair-like ﬁbres spread all over the soil. The stalk is on off-white colour,
ﬂeshy when young but becoming horny on maturity. The base of the stem has white
valves adhered to it. On the ventral side of the umbrella are numerous gills, which
enclose spores and disperse them on maturity.
   Wasson (1972) provided coloured photographs of all the developmental stages of
ﬂy agaric and compared them with the descriptions given in the vedas. The author also
concluded that the use of soma was comparable to the hallucinogenic fungi used by
some tribes of Mexico for religious rites. A soma-like drink is still consumed in some
areas of Central Asia and Siberia, the areas from which Aryans probably migrated to India.
                                                                              Som Ras   263




    Figure 40 A Periploca aphylla, B Ephedra vulgaris, C Surcostemma bravitigma,
              D Amanita muscaria (diagrammatic).




Chemical studies
It contains hallucinogenic compounds like muscimol, muscarin, ibotenic acid and
tropane alkaloids. During the drying of ﬂy agaric, ibotenic acid changes to muscimol
(Schultes and Hofmann, 1992).

Toxicological studies
In small doses Amanita extract relaxes the body and imparts peace of mind but after
some time the hallucinogenic effect begins. The body becomes semi-conscious with
264 Som Ras
the stimulation of the nervous system, vivid dreams, recollection of old memories and
supernatural feelings. Long-term use of this herb is harmful.

References
Puri, H.S. Medicinal Plants of India (in Punjabi). Punjab State University Text Book Board,
  Chandigarh India 1977.
Schultes, R.E., Hofmann, A. Plants of the Gods. Their Sacred, Healing and Hallucinogenic Powers.
  Healing Arts Press, Rochester, Vermont 1992.
Wasson, R.G. Soma: Divine Mushroom of Immortality. Harcourt Blace Jovanovich Inc. USA 1972.
                                                                               Sonth 265

49 Sonth




    Zingiber ofﬁcinale Roscoe
    Family: Zingiberace


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It grows in hot, humid, sub-tropical climates in many parts of the world. The herb
has broad leaves, arising from the ground (Fig. 41A). It rarely ﬂowers. The fresh root
is called adrak and the dried root sonth in most parts of India (Fig. 41B). Before
drying, the rhizome is boiled in water and the outer corky layers are scrapped.
It is cut longitudinally and dried. Sometimes calcium is added to the water before
boiling.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

As per Ayurveda, it is pleasant anti-ama, anti-vata, digestant, pungent, light, oily, hot
in effect, laxative and anti-inﬂammatory. It makes food tasty and increases vital ﬂuids.
It helps bronchial troubles, nausea, vomiting and heart diseases.
   Throughout the whole of Asia, from China to Turkey, ginger has a reputation of
being a powerful aphrodisiac. A masticate of a mixture of ginger, cinnamon, Piper
cubeba and Anacyclus pyrethrum is often recommended for this purpose. Ginger juice is
an aphrodisiac if taken with honey and half boiled egg at night for a month. It is said
to strengthen the sex organs and cure impotence.
   In traditional Chinese medicine dry ginger rhizome is used to expel interior cold,
while fresh ginger disperses exterior cold (Bone, 1997).

Ayurvedic Formulation

Subhagya Shunthi Pak

Method Take 750 g ginger, 750 g ghee and 25 g each of Asparagus, Pueraria,
Chlorophytum, Tribulus, Sida root, Tinospora starch, cinnamon, cardamom, Cinnamomum
spp. leaves, Indian thyme, Abies leaves, celery, fennel, Pluchea lanceolata, Inula racemosa,
266 Sonth




    Figure 41 Zingiber ofﬁcinale A herb, B dry rhizome.




bamboo manna, Cedrus deodara wood, dill, Hedychium spicatum, Nardostachys grandiﬂora,
calamus, Butea gum, Mesua ferrea, mace, fenugreek, Glycyrrhiza, Santalum album, Pterocar-
pus santalinus, Embelia ribes, Vetiveria, Adhatoda, coriander, Randia dumetorum, Cyperus
scariosus and 3.25 kg sugar. Make ﬁne powders of all the herbs and ginger separately.
Fry ginger in ghee, and when warm add the powdered herbs, sugar and make balls of
about 20 g each.
                                                                             Sonth 267
Dose Half to one ball with one teaspoon of ghee, twice daily with milk, for 90 days.

Use It makes women’s bodies strong and healthy, giving them a good shape.
It increases breast size and cures diseases of the generative system. It clears pimples,
acne, blemishes, etc. from the face and makes the skin smooth and lustrous. If used by
lactating mothers, the breastfed infant receives all the beneﬁcial effects of ginger.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

It is used in tonic preparations for women, mainly after conﬁnement. It is an anti-
oxidant, anti-microbial and acts as a preservative. Puri (1988) and Bone (1997) have
given a review of the medicinal uses of ginger. The important points given in these
articles and additional information are as follows:

As an anti-inﬂammatory agent
Ginger extract reduced swelling and was as active as aspirin. Patients suffering from
rheumatoid arthritis received relief using it. The pungent active constituent, gingerol,
inhibited prostaglandin and leukotriene synthesis (Kiuchi et al. 1992). It was a more
potent inhibitor of prostaglandin biosynthesis than indomethacin. The essential oil of
ginger inhibited chronic adjuvant arthritis in rats (Bone, 1997).

As a digestive agent
Ginger has a proteolytic enzyme action similar to papain. It has a stimulating action
on bile, saliva production, gastric secretion and helps digestion by increasing metabolism
(Sambiah and Srinivasan, 1989, 1991).

Anti-ulcer activity
It inhibited experimentally-induced gastric ulcers. Through its anti-microbial activity
it prevented ulceration and inhibited the manufacture of prostaglandin (Bone, 1997).

As an anti-microbial agent
It was effective against both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria in various
culture experiments. At the dose of 3 g, thrice daily, it had a signiﬁcant effect on
Entamoeba histolytica and Giardia spp. Anti-viral, anti-fungal, anthelmintic, anti-ﬁlarial
and molluscicidal activities have also been observed (Bone, 1997, Billing and Sherman,
1998).

As a cardiotonic
Ginger has a tonic effect on the heart’s action (Shogi, 1982). It can increase blood
pressure by restricting blood ﬂow in the peripheral area of the body. It has anti-
platelet activity and a positive inotropic effect (Bone, 1997).
268 Sonth
For lowering cholesterol
It lowered cholesterol both in the blood and in the liver by impairing its absorption.
It suppressed appetite, which further decreased cholesterol intake (Giri et al. 1984,
Bhasakar et al. 1984). The effect was not immediate. Tanabe et al. (1993) isolated a
compound from ginger, which had an inhibitory effect on cholesterol biosynthesis.

In hepatotoxicity
It countered liver toxicity by increasing bile secretion (Sambiah and Srinivasan, 1991).

Anti-tumour effect
Ethanol extract showed a biphasic effect on the secretion of cytokines by human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells in vitro (Cheng et al. 1995).

Anti-emetic effect
Many studies have shown that it increased bile secretion, prevented nausea and motion
sickness. It had central nervous system depressant, cough suppressant, anti-vomiting,
anti-convulsant and prostaglandin synthesis inhibition properties (Bone, 1997).

As an immunomodulator
Ginger had a stimulating effect on the immune system (Bone, 1997).

In migraine headaches
It helped neurological disorders, particularly migraines (Mustafa and Srivastava, 1990).

As an anabolic agent
In malabsorption syndromes, it improved body weight, appetite and increased
haemoglobin percentage (Nanda et al. 1985, 1993).

Hypo-uricaemic effects
Maheshwari et al. (1995) administered water and alcohol extract of ginger for 30 days
and observed a signiﬁcant fall in the level of serum uric acid. Alcohol extract was more
effective.

Chemical studies
It contains 1.0–2.5 per cent essential oils, pungent principles gingerols and shogaols
(Bone, 1997).

Toxicological studies
It should be used with care during pregnancy.
                                                                                    Sonth 269
References
Bhaskar, P.A., Rao, K.S., Rao, M.V.R., Venkatachalam, M.S. (1984) Effect of spices in food on
  blood cholesterol. Current Medical Practitioner, 29, 96–97.
Billing, J., Sherman, P.W. (1998) Antimicrobial functions of spices, why some like it hot.
  Quarterly Review of Biology, 73, 3– 49.
Bone, K. (1997) Ginger. British Journal of Phytotherapy, 4, 110–120.
Cheng, C.P., Chang, J.Y., Wang, F.Y., Chang, J.G. (1995) The effect of Chinese medicinal
  herb Zingiber rhizome extract on cytokine secretion by human peripheral blood mononuclear
  cells. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 48, 13–19.
Giri, J., Sakthi Devi, T.K., Meerarani, S. (1984) Effect of ginger on serum cholesterol levels.
  Indian Journal of Nutrition and Dietetician, 21, 433– 436.
Kiuchi, F., Iwakami, S., Shibuya, M., Hanaoka, F., Sankawa, U. (1992) Inhibition of
  prostaglandin and leukotriene biosynthesis by gingerols and diarylheptanoids. Chemical and
  Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 40, 387–392.
Maheshwari, A.K., Tiwari, M.P., Pant, M.C. (1995) Hypouricemic effect of Zingiber ofﬁcinlae
  (ginger) extract. Indian Journal of Hospital Pharmacy, 32, 18–20.
Mustafa, T., Srivastava, K.C. (1990) Ginger (Zingiber ofﬁcinale) in migraine headache. Journal of
  Ethnopharmacology, 29, 267–273.
Nanda, G.C., Tewari, N.S., Prem Kishore (1985) Clinical studies on the role of Sunthi in the
  treatment of Grahni Roga. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 6, 78–87.
Nanda, G.C., Tewari, N.S., Prem Kishore (1993) Clinical evaluation of Sunthi (Zingiber ofﬁcinale)
  in the treatment of Grahni Roga. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 14, 34– 44.
Puri, H.S. (1988) Ginger: nature’s remedy for heart patients. Quarterly Newsletter of American
  Herb Association, 6, 8–9.
Sambiah, K., Srinivasan, K. (1989) Inﬂuence of spices and spice principles on hepatic mixed
  function oxygenase system in rats. Indian Journal of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 26, 254–258.
Sambiah, K., Srinivasan, K. (1991) Secretion and composition of bile in rats, fed diet contain-
  ing spices. Journal of Food Science and Technology, 28, 35–38.
Shogi, N. (1982) Cardiotonic principles of ginger (Zingiber ofﬁcinale). Journal of Pharmaceutical
  Sciences, 71, 1174–75.
Tanabe, M., Chen, U.D., Saito, K.I., Kano, Y. (1993) Cholesterol biosynthesis inhibitory com-
  ponent from Zingiber ofﬁcinale. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 41, 710–713.
270 Talamkhana

50 Talamkhana




    Hygrophila spinosa T. And.
    Syn: Astercantha longifolia Nees.
    Hygrophila auriculata (Schum.) Hiene
    Family: Acanthaceae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is a spinescent herb (Fig. 42) which grows in marshy land, along rivers and in ponds
in warm areas. It may grow up to 1 m tall, with yellow, sharp spines up to 2 cm long.
The leaves are coarse, lanceolate, in a spiral of six, of which the outer two leaves are
longer, maybe up to 20 cm long, while the inner four leaves are 4 cm long. Flowers are
bluish to violet, about 3 cm long and in pairs of four. The fruit is ﬂat, 8 mm long,
rectangular, sharp, consisting of 4–8 seed. The seeds are red and hirsuate. When
chewed the seeds are tasteless but there is a secretion of tenacious mucilage.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

The seed is considered diuretic, a tonic, augmentative, an aphrodisiac and sperm-
atogenic. It is used for inﬂammation and allied diseases of the liver, urino-genital
problems and sexual inadequacies. It affords strength, virility and increases seminal
retention ability. The seed is hard to digest, causes constipation and so is used with
milk and sugar.
   In general debility and impotency, 10 g of talamkhana seed with an equal quantity
of processed Mucuna seed or a powder of 10 g each of talamkhana, gokshru and shatawari
is prescribed with milk.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

As a hepatoprotective agent
Singh and Handa (1995) tried methanolic extract for this purpose.
                                                                      Talamkhana 271




    Figure 42 Hygrophila spinosa twig.




Anti-tumour activity
Mazumdar et al. (1997) observed that the petroleum ether extract from the root
inhibited anti-tumour activity in mice with Ehrlich ascites carcinoma and sarcoma
180.

Chemical studies
The seed has 23 per cent fatty oil. It also contains the enzymes diastase, lipase and
protease.

References
Mazumdar, U.K., Malaya Gupta, Maiti, S., Mukherjee, D. (1997) Antitumour activity of
   Hygrophila spinosa on Ehrlich ascites carcinoma and sarcoma 180 induced in mice. Indian
   Journal of Experimental Biology, 35, 473–477.
Singh, A., Handa, S.S. (1995) Hepatoprotective activity of Apium graveolens and Hygrophila
   auriculata against paracetamol and thioacetamide intoxication in rat. Journal of Ethno-
   pharmacology, 49, 119–126.
272 Tulsi

51 Tulsi




    Ocimum tenuiﬂorum L.
    Syn. O. sanctum L.
    Family: Lamiaceae (Labiate)

In scientiﬁc literature, the name Ocimum sanctum is commonly used for this herb. The
same has been followed in this book. It is also known as Holy basil or Sacred basil.


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is grown in most Hindu houses and is worshipped. Tulsi is allocated sixth place
amongst eight objects of worship in Hindu rituals. It is satvik, having spiritual uplift-
ing qualities. Five types of tulsi have been recognized in ancient texts. Of these Ram
(green) and Krishna (black) are varieties of O. tenuiﬂorum. The identiﬁcation of other
types is doubtful.
   The herb (Fig. 43) is very branched, slightly woody and often pale purple in colour.
The leaves are ovate, elliptic, oblong, 3 to 4.5 cm long and 1.5 to 2 cm broad, hairy,
with minute dots and margin entire. Flowers are purple-pink and whorled in racemes.
   The herb survives only in a warm climate in summer.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

Tulsi is widely prescribed for diseases due to vata. The other uses are:

Antidote to poisons
Tulsi destroys the poisons (ama) generated in the body due to irregularities in dietary
habits, indisciplined lifestyle, lack of self control or weakness. It is also an antidote for
environmental pollutants.

For skin diseases
External application of the leaf paste helps minor skin infections, such as acne, etc.
                                                                          Tulsi 273




    Figure 43 Ocimum tenuiﬂorum twig.




For incurable diseases
It is helpful in diseases such as cancer and high blood pressure. If a rigid regulated
lifestyle is followed, it may be effective in leukaemia.
274 Tulsi
As a general tonic
The juice is sharp and bitter. It stimulates the digestive system, prevents vitiation of
blood, rejuvenates the body, increases vital ﬂuid (semen) and cures nervous weakness.
Five grams of the leaf juice, twice daily has a Rasayana-like effect.

As an anti-stress agent
Tulsi, in the form of a tea, helps stress-related diseases due to physical, chemical or
biological causes. It is particularly useful for peptic ulcers, heart diseases, hypertension,
colitis, post-operative complications and even asthma.

As a brain tonic
Tulsi beads have long been used for mental peace. Tulsi leaves improve memory by
stimulating brain activity. It helps forgetfulness and irregular delirium. Through its
use mentally retarded children show noticable improvement. As a brain tonic, swal-
low ﬁve leaves in the morning with water or crush 10 tulsi leaves, 5 black peppers and
4 almonds and mix in honey.

As an aphrodisiac
Various recipes for this purpose are:

1   Drink a decoction of leaves with a pinch of cardamom powder and 10 g of Orchis
    powder.
2   Mix a ﬁne powder of 5 parts tulsi seed, 5 parts Tribulus, 3 parts Mucuna, 4 parts
    Chlorophytum and 6 parts sugar. The dose is 20 g.
3   Chew small pieces of the root.
4   Mix tulsi seed and sugar in equal parts. Take 5 g of this mixture for two months.
5   Make pills of 3 g each from mixture of powdered tulsi and unreﬁned sugar. Take
    one pill twice daily for 45 days.

For coughs, colds and ﬂu
The juice of leaves is diaphoretic, antiperiodic, stimulating, antiseptic and expector-
ant. It is used in catarrh and bronchitis.

1   Inﬂuenza, boil 10–15 leaves in 200 ml of water until reduced to half. Add a pinch
    of salt and administer while warm. Repeat this medication 2–3 times daily. It will
    induce perspiration.
2   For coughs, colds, all throat problems and body aches, etc., boil 11 tulsi leaves,
    one black pepper, a pinch of ginger and a pinch of salt in a cup of water until
    reduced to half. Prescribe thrice daily.
3   For asthma, take the leaf juice in honey, 3– 4 times a day.

For indigestion
An infusion of leaves is used in hepatic affections and gastric disorders in children.
                                                                             Tulsi 275
   For increasing appetite, make a mixture by pulverizing equal quantities of tulsi
leaves, seeds of cardamom, cumin, ginger, cinnamon, Indian thyme, mint, black salt.
The dose is 10 g of powder with 20–50 ml of water, every hour until cured. Drink
yogurt products only. Do not use milk, sugar or honey.

In gynaecological practices

For stimulating lactation
Take 20 ml of tulsi juice, 20 ml of maize leaf juice, 10 ml of Withania juice and 10 g
honey, for seven days, following childbirth.

For leucorrhoea
Take 20 ml tulsi juice with rice gruel. Do not use milk. Eat only rice.

For amenorrhoea
Take 125 g each of tulsi seed, sesame seed, tender shoots of cotton and bamboo plants
and 250 g of unreﬁned sugar. Mix all these in a wet grinder until they are kneaded.
Make pea-sized pills. Take one pill twice daily with water until the regularity of
periods is restored.

For urinary problems
Seeds are prescribed for involuntary urination in children, burning sensation during
urination and mucus discharge in urine, etc.

Contraindication
Tulsi is considered hot for women. Use it with other herbs that have a cooling effect.

Ayurvedic preparations
Laghu raahmriga

Ingredients   Take equal quantities of tulsi juice, ghee and black pepper.

Dose One tablespoon.

Use It helps all acute, chronic, and incurable diseases.

Tulsi arishta

Ingredients Take 700 g Acacia nilotica bark, 80 g of whole tulsi plants, 500 g raw sugar,
80 g Emblica ofﬁcinalis ﬂower and 10 g each of black pepper, long pepper, cardamom
seed, nutmeg, cinnamon, Piper cubeba seed, C. tamala leaves, and Mesua ferrea ﬂowers.
276 Tulsi
Method Boil bark in 15 litres of water until reduced to one-fourth, strain the decoction,
store in an earthen pot and add the coarse powder of all the other ingredients. Make
the pot airtight by sealing the lid. Let the content ferment for one month. Filter and
store in the bottles.

Dose 12–15 ml twice daily.

Use It provides nutrition to the body, imparts strength and vigour to the bronchial
and digestive systems of patients. It is said to increase quantity and improve quality of
semen.

Tulsi tea

Ingredients 500 g of shade-dried Tulsi leaves, 50 g cinnamon, 100 g cinnamon leaves,
100 g Centella, 25 g Viola bicolor, 250 g fennel, 150 g cardamom seed, 250 g Pterocarpus
santalinus and 25 g black pepper.

Method   Make a coarse powder of all items.

Dose Take 1 g powder in a cup of water, boil and make a tea.

Use It increases digestion and provides required energy to the body against all diseases.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Immunomodulator activity
Tulsi has an immunosuppressing effect and modiﬁes host resistance to a number of
conditions including allergic, infectious disorders and stress-induced changes (Godhwani
et al. 1988, Mediratta et al. 1988).

Effect on the nervous system
Sakina et al. (1990) studied the effect of an ethanol extract fraction on the central
nervous system (CNS). All the actions resembled those of low doses of barbiturates.
It could reduce the severity and duration of electric shocks, and pentylene tetrazole-
induced convulsions. It decreased the apomorphine-induced ﬁghting response. Singh
et al. (1991) studied the biochemical changes brought about by tulsi during stress.
Ahumada et al. (1991) observed the depressing effect of the extract on the mouse
nervous system. There was a signiﬁcant increase in the narcosis time, which was dose
dependent. It had a clear synergism with pentobarbitol in depressing the mouse’s CNS
response. It also had an anti-spasmodic effect. The crude aqueous extract potentiated
hexabarbitone-induced hypnosis in rats. Singh and Agarwal (1991) tried it against
induced pre-convulsive dyspnoea. Volatile oil from the leaves and ﬁxed oil from the
seed was effective. These also inhibited hind paw oedema in rats. Singh and Majumdar
(1995) noted that the analgesic activity of the herb’s ﬁxed oils was related to the
                                                                               Tulsi 277
peripheral system and was not centrally mediated like morphine. The effect may be
due to prostaglandin inhibition.

Anti-pyretic activity
Tandan et al. (1989) observed that the essential oils had signiﬁcant anti-pyretic activity.

Hypotensive effects
Subbulakshmi and Sarvaiya (1991) noted this effect.

Adaptogenic properties
Bhargava and Singh (1981) and Dadekar et al. (1988) noted anti-stress activity in the
herb, while Singh et al. (1989) studied it for anoxia tolerance. Ahumada et al. (1991)
observed an adaptogenic effect in-induced narcosis in rats. It enhanced the physical
endurance and survival time, and protected against modulated humoral immune re-
sponses. Bhattacharya et al. (1994–1995) studied the modulation of blood sugar levels
in stress-induced rats by this herb. Trivedi et al. (1995) carried a clinical evaluation
of the leaf powder for laryngo-pharyngitis, bronchial asthma and in stress-related
hypertension. It was found to be a highly efﬁcacious immunomodulator in humans. It
increased cell-mediated immune response. Kozlovskaya (1996) studied the psychotropic
effects of an essential oil and water extract on the behaviour of rats under acute
emotional stress and on the status of the lymphoid organs (thymus, adrenal glands and
spleen); both the water extract and essential oil had a similar effect in correcting
behavioural as well as somatic reactions to stress. Sadekar et al. (1998) carried out
research on the immunomodulating effect of dry leaf powder on humoral response in
poultry, naturally infected with infectious bursal disease, IBD virus. The powder had
a positive immunostimulatory effect and it overcame the immunosuppressive effect of
the IBD infection.

Anti-ulcerogenic effect
Singh et al. (1991) observed the slowing effect of the herb on intestinal transit, which
may be useful in emotional tension where intestinal motility is usually increased. This
was attenuated to different degrees. Mandal et al. (1993) observed that the administra-
tion of the leaves reduced the ulcer index, and both free and total acidity in acute and
chronic cases. Pre-treatment for seven days increased mucous secretion.

In skin diseases
Savargaonkar et al. (1990) tried a mixture of tulsi and Nyctanthes arbor-tristis on eczema
by applying it externally. Bantwal and Mardikar (1990) clinically tried the black
variety of the herb on leprosy patients.

Hypoglycaemic effect
The leaf extract was studied using normal and diabetic rats (Chattopadhaya, 1993).
278 Tulsi
Anaphrodisiac effect
Kantak and Gogate (1992) noted that higher doses of the leaves decreased the sexual
behaviour of animals.

As an anti-cancerous agent
Prashar and Ashok Kumar (1995) investigated the chemopreventive activity of the
ethanol extract of leaves against 2,12-dimethylbenz (a) anthracene (DMBA) induced
papillomagenesis in the skin of mice. The extract had signiﬁcant anti-neoplastic activity.

Radioprotective effect
Uma Devi and Ganasoundari (1995) studied the radioprotective effect of water or
aqueous ethanol extract of the leaves before complete exposure of the body to gamma
radiation in albino mice. Water extract was more effective than hydroalcohol menstrum.
Intraperitoneal administration of these extracts gave the best protection. Furthermore
Ganasoundari et al. (1997a,b) studied the modiﬁcation of bone marrow radio sensitivity.
An aqueous extract of the leaves was found to protect mice against lethal radiation levels.
Ganasoundari et al. (1998) observed that the leaf extract enhanced bone marrow radiopro-
tection and toxicity. Pre-treatment of tissues with tulsi resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease
in aberrant cells as well as different types of aberrations. It also acted as a detoxiﬁer.

Anti-haemorrhagic effect
Jangde et al. (1996) noted that the aqueous and alcoholic extract of leaves signiﬁcantly
reduced the duration of bleeding in rabbits. The alcohol extract was more effective.

Antioxidant effect
Eugenol, one of the main ingredients of tulsi essential oil inhibited the accumulation
of lipid peroxidation products in red blood cells, and maintained the activities of
antioxidant enzymes. It protected free radical attack on the membrane and maintained
the activities of antioxidant enzymes (Kumaravelu et al. 1996).

Chemical studies
The essential oil from the whole plant contained 71.3 per cent eugenol, 3.2 per cent
carvacrol, 20.4 per cent methyl eugenol and 1.7 per cent caryophyllene.

References
Ahumada, F., Tricado, M.A., Arellano, J.A., Hancke, J., Wikman, G. (1991) Effect of certain
  adaptogenic plant extracts on drug-induced narcosis in female and male mice. Phytotherapy
  Research, 5, 29–31.
Bantwal, H.V., Mardikar, B.R. Clinical study of the effect of Krishna Tulsi to hospitalised
  leprosy patients (Abstract). Proceedings of 42th Indian Pharmaceutical Congress, Manipal, 28–30
  December 1990.
                                                                                     Tulsi 279
Bhargava, K.P., Singh, N. (1981) Antistress activity of Ocimum sanctum Linn. Indian Journal of
   Medical Research, 73, 443–451.
Bhattacharya, P., Banerjee, R., Roy, U., Banerjee, B.P. (1994–1995) Modulation of blood
   sugar level of stress-induced albino rats with Ocimum sanctum. International Conference on
   Progress in Medicinal and Aromatic Plant Research, Calcutta, India. 30 December 1994.
Chattopadhyaya, R.R. (1993) Hypoglycaemic effect of Ocimum sanctum leaf extract in normal
   and strepozoticin diabetic rats. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 31, 891–893.
Dadkar, V.N., Joshi, A.G., Jagusta, V.S., Billimoria, F.R., Dhar, H.L. (1988) Antistress activity
   of Ocimum sanctum (Tulsi). Indian Drugs, 25, 172–175.
Ganasoundari, A., Uma Devi, P., Rao, B.S.S. (1998) Enhancement of bone marrow
   radioprotection and reduction of WR-2721 toxicity by Ocimum sanctum. Mutation Research,
   Fundamental and Molecular Mechanisms of Mutagenesis 397, 303–312.
Ganasoundari, A., Uma Devi, P., Rao, M.N.A. (1997a) Protection against radiation-induced
   chromosome damage in mouse bone marrow by Ocimum sanctum. Mutation Research, Funda-
   mental and Molecular Mechanisms of Mutagenesis, 373, 271–276.
Ganasoundari, A., Zare, S.M., Uma Devi, (1997b) Modiﬁcation of bone marrow radiosensitivity
   by medicinal plant extracts. British Journal of Radiobiology, 70, 599–602.
Godhwani, S., Godhwani, J.L., Vyas, D.S. (1988) Ocimum sanctum: a preliminary study evaluating
   its immunoregulatory proﬁles in albino rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 24, 193–198.
Jangde, C.R., Ladukar, O.N., Maske, D.K., Patil, G.D. (1996) Effect of Ocimum sanctum Linn.
   on bleeding time in rabbits. International Journal of Animal Sciences, 11, 249–250.
Kantak, N.M., Gogate, M.G. (1992) Effect of short term administration of Tulsi (Ocimum
   sanctum) Linn. on reproduction behaviour of adult male rats. Indian Journal of Physiology and
   Pharmacology, 36, 109–111.
Kozlovskaya, M.M., Blednov, Y.A., Czabak-Garbacz, R., Kozlovksy, I.I., Arefolov, V.A. (1996)
   Stress correction effects of Ocimum sanctum L.: a psychopharmacological and neurochemical
   study. Herba Polonica, 42, 289–294.
Kumaravelu, P., Shanthi, S., Dakshinamoorhy, D.P., Devraj, N.S. (1996) The antioxidant effect
   of eugenol on CCl4-induced erythrocyte damage in rats. Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry, 7,
   23–28.
Mandal, S., Das, D.N., Ray, K.D., Chaudhury, S.B., Sahana, C.C., Choudhuri, M.K. (1993)
   Ocimum sanctum Linn. A study of gastric secretion in rats. Indian Journal of Physiology and
   Pharmacology, 37, 91–92.
Mediratta, P.K., Dewan, V., Maiti, P.C., Sen, P. (1988) Effect of Ocimum sanctum Linn. on
   humoral immunoresponses. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 87, 384–386.
Prashar, Ritu., Ashok Kumar (1995) Chemopreventive action of Ocimum sanctum on 2,12
   dimethylbenz (a) anthracene DMBA-induced papillomagenesis in the skin of mice. Interna-
   tional Journal of Pharmacognosy, 33, 181–187.
Sadekar, R.D., Pimprikar, N.M., Bhandarkar, A.G., Barmase, B.S. (1988) Immunomodulating
   effect of Ocimum sanctum Linn. Dry leaf powder on humoral immune response in poultry
   naturally infected with IBD virus. Indian Veterinary Journal, 75, 73–74.
Sakina, M.R., Dandiya, P.C., Hamdard, M.E., Hameed, A. (1990) Preliminary psychopharmaco-
   logical evaluation of Ocimum sanctum leaf extract. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 28, 148–150.
Savargaonkar, V.V., Karanjkar, A.M., Kulkarni, P.H. (1990) Action of Sushama (Suksma medi-
   cine). Deerghayu International, 6, 5
Singh, N., Misra, N., Srivastava, A.K., Dixit, K.S., Gupta, G.P. (1991) Effect of antistress plants
   on biochemical changes during stress reaction. Indian Journal of Pharmacology, 23, 137–142.
Singh, N., Tomar, V.S., Chandra, T., Gupta, G.P. (1989) A comparative evaluation of the
   effects of some species of Ocimum on anoxia tolerance in albino rats. Planta Medica, 55, 95.
Singh, S., Agrawal, S.S. (1991) Anti-asthmatic and anti-inﬂammatory activity of Ocimum sanc-
   tum. International Journal of Pharmacognosy, 29, 306–310.
280 Tulsi
Singh, S., Majumdar, D.K. (1995) Analgesic activity of Ocimum sanctum and its possible mech-
   anism of action. International Journal of Pharmacognosy, 33, 188–192.
Singh, V., Singh, A., Nath, R., Mishra, N., Dixit, K.S., Singh, N. (1991) Effect of some anti-
   stress plant drugs on the intestinal transit. Journal of Biological and Chemical Research, 10,
   601–602.
Subbulakshmi, G., Sarvaiya, S.R. (1991) Hypotensive effect of Ocimum sanctum. Bombay Hospital
   Journal, 33, 39– 43.
Tandan, S.K., Chandra, S., Jawahar Lal (1989) Pharmacological screening of the essential oil of
   Ocimum sanctum leaves. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 51, 71–72.
Trivedi, V.P., Singh, S.K., Sharma, S.C., Singh, N. (1995) A clinical evaluation of Tulsi
   (Ocimum sanctum Linn) leaf powder in cases of laryngopharyngitis and coryza (common
   cold and cough). Seminar on Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, CCRAS, New Delhi, 20–22
   March 1995.
Uma Devi, P., Ganasoundri, A. (1995) Radioprotective effect of leaf extract of Indian medicinal
   plant Ocimum sanctum. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 33, 205–208.
                                                                           Vacha 281

52 Vacha




    Acorus calamus L.
    Family: Araceae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

This herb originated in east Europe and adjoining areas. In India it grows in marshy
and humid land in many places. It has sword-like leaves (Fig. 44A), arranged in a
rosette, from the centre of which a bunch of blue or violet ﬂowers may arise, hence the
name blue ﬂag. The root is about 1 cm thick, spreads prostrate within the soil and has
distinct nodes and internodes. Numerous root ﬁbres arise all over the internodes.
During collection, the root (Fig. 44B) is removed from the soil, cut into 5 cm long
pieces and dried. On drying it becomes rather ﬂat with longitudinal striations. The
central vascular portion is darker than the rest of the root. It has a distinct strong
aromatic odour.
   In Indian it is known as vacha or ghorvacha and it is distinguished from balvacha or
parsik vacha (khurasani vacha) which does not have a central darker portion and is white
throughout. It is obtained from Iris germanica L, which is cultivated in graveyards of
Muslims in Kashmir. It is said that the root’s smell keeps predators (rats) away, which
would otherwise prey on the dead bodies. Tuberous roots of Paris polyphylla are also
considered a source of this commodity.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

Since antiquity, calamus root has been used for medicinal baths, in incense and tea.
In many areas magical effects are attributed to the plant. It is said that calamus
root keeps people young, strengthens their health and boosts their sexual lives.
A herbal bath with calamus is said to increase erotic desire. The original inhabitants
of North America chewed the roots to ward off exhaustion or took it as snuff in
a pulverized form (Ratsch, 1997). It is combined with Centella to stimulate sex
and promote wisdom. It is commonly considered a hallucinogenic herb, but a number
of people who tried the American strain (asarone-free) for this purpose did not
have good experiences. In some cases the person required medical attention after
ingestion. For pleasure, at least 30 cm of root has to be swallowed with a non-alcoholic
beverage: carbonated drink, milk, etc. Alcohol counteracts its effect.
282 Vacha




    Figure 44 Acorus calamus A herb, B root pieces.




   In Ayurveda the root is considered aromatic, bitter, hot, nauseating, anthelmintic,
sudoriﬁc, mildly laxative and it is said to help inﬂammation, gaseous distension, and
fevers. The details on these uses are as follows:
                                                                              Vacha 283
As a mental tonic
For intellectuals and students it is often prescribed with Centella, Bacopa and Convolvulus
as a mental tonic. It increases memory and stimulates brain faculties. It helps uncon-
sciousness, insanity, nervous breakdown, in physical debility and acts as a cerebral
stimulant. It may be used by mixing half a teaspoon each of vacha and ghee, with milk
for 2–3 months.

For pains and aches
Make a paste of the root by grinding it on a wet ﬂoor and apply it to the forehead.
When applied externally it stimulates blood ﬂow. It may be used on bruises and
rheumatism in the same way.

For migraines
Make a very ﬁne powder of vacha and long pepper and inhale a pinch of this mixture
through nose.

For expelling worms
Heat 500 mg of asafoetida and add to it 3 g vacha powder. Swallow it with water.
In acute cases use the mixture twice daily for 4–5 days.
   An infusion of the root is sprinkled on the affected wound to drive away vermin.

For dry coughs
Briskly boil 25 g of coarse vacha powder in 250 ml of water. When warm, take 20 ml
of this decoction, 3– 4 times daily. It clears the throat and relieves dry throats and
coughs. It stimulates the mucous membrane and salivary glands, which results in
increased secretion.

For sinusitis
Sprinkle vacha powder on burning charcoal or a heater to produce smoke. Convert a
piece of thick paper into a funnel-shaped structure, 15 cm in diameter at the broad
end and about 1 cm at the tapered end (Fig. 45). Place the broader end slightly above
the smoke source in such a way that the funnel does not catch ﬁre but collects all the
fumes. The tapering end should be placed near the nostrils so that the smoke is
inhaled. Smoke is pungent but very effective. It clears the nose and through regular
treatment surgical operations for sinusitis may even be avoided.

For stomach troubles
For digestive problems such as ﬂatulence, dyspepsia and colic, boil 25 g of vacha in
500 ml of water and take 10–20 ml of decoction, depending on the severity of the
case. For infants, grind vacha into mother’s milk and give half a teaspoonful three
times a day.
284 Vacha




      Figure 45 Method to inhale the fumes of the herb.

For spermatorrhoea
Pulverize 30 g Triphala, 10 g Piper cubeba, 10 g vacha and 5 g camphor. Take 2 g of
this powder with cold water, lime water or with milk in the morning on an empty
stomach, and two hours after meals in the evening. Continue until cured. This treat-
ment makes the body physically strong, clears urine and helps digestion.

Contraindication
All items hot in nature, such as spicy, non-vegetarian food, alcohol, sex, etc. should be
avoided during treatment with calamus.

Ayurvedic preparation

Sarswat churn

Ingredients Pulverize equal quantities of Centella, Convolvulus and calamus. Moisten
this mixture with Centella juice or decoction and let the powder dry. Repeat this
process of moistening with juice three times. When fully dry use the powder.

Dose 3 g with milk for 3–4 months.

Use    As a general tonic, it increases mental and physical strength.
                                                                             Vacha 285
THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

Relaxant activity
A papaverine-like relaxant, depressant and anti-spasmodic activity has been seen in the
essential oil and in its isolated compounds asarone and β-asarone. It inhibited heart
rhythms in frogs and dogs and relaxed the tone of isolated intestine. The neurophar-
macological action of the oil revealed its sedative and tranquillizing effect. It caused a
reduction in anxiety without dullness but with prolonged calming. It enhanced the
activity of pentabarbitol and hexobarbital. Asarone antagonized the hyperactive and
hallucinogenic effects of mescaline (personal communication). Both asarone and β-
asarone are psychoactive, but hallucinogenic in higher doses. The essential oil-free
alcohol extract had a sedative and analgesic property. The choloroform extract of the
root had a cannabis-like activity, and the intraperitoneal administration of this extract
brought about profound behavioural changes in monkeys (Dasgupta et al. 1977).
Khare and Sharma (1982) observed anti-epileptic activity in it. Keller et al. (1985)
noted that asarone had a spasmolytic activity against histamine. Aqueous alcohol
extract reduced the severity of maximum shock-induced seizures but did not exhibit
complete protection (Vohora et al. 1990). According to Martis et al. (1991) Acorus may
be of use for epilepsy. Prasad and Chakraborty (1992) found it to be less tranquillizing
but more hypotensive in nature. Zanoli et al. (1997) studied sedative and hypothermic
effects induced by β-asarone and concluded that this compound cannot be considered
a direct cannabinomimetic agent.
   A polyherbal preparation containing ginseng, Polygala, Calamus and Macrohyporia
extensa was given to thymectomized mice after the operation. It signiﬁcantly amelior-
ated the learning and memory ability, which was impaired by thymecotomy. It acted
on the cognitive process of the central nervous system (Zhou et al. 1992, Zhang et al.
1994).

For mental retardation
A polyherbal formulation consisting of Centella asiatica, Calamus and Convolvulus was
given to mentally retarded children, in doses of 1,000 mg, 380 mg and 20 mg for one
year. The treated group showed an appreciable increase in verbal mental age within
seven and a half months, compared with the control. These herbs improved atten-
tion, activity levels and feed back, and controlled hyperactivity, aggressiveness, etc.
(Rajagopalan, 1995).

Anti-inﬂammatory effect
The total extract had anti-inﬂammatory activity in acute and chronic models.
It compared well with hydrocortisone and phenylbutazone (Sharma et al. 1989).
Anti-pyretic, analgesic and anti-inﬂammatory activities were also observed in this root
by Vohora et al. (1989) and by Siddiqui and Asif (1991).
286 Vacha
In gastropathy
Rafatullah et al. (1994) observed anti-secretagogue, anti-ulcer and cytoprotective pro-
perties in the ethanol extract of the herb. It had the ability to inhibit gastric secre-
tion, to protect gastroduodenal mucosa against injuries caused by pyloric ligation,
indomethacin, reserpine, etc. It provided good protection against cytodestructive agents.

Anti-microbial properties
It exhibited anti-bacterial activities against Mycobacterium tuberculosis and other gram
negative organisms (Alankar Rao and Rajendra Prasad, 1981).
   The alcohol extract exhibited potent anti-viral activity in vitro against HSV-1
and HSV-2 virus types at well below a cytotoxic concentration. Host cells were not
affected by the extract. The compound β-asarone, isolated from the extract, had a strong
inhibitory activity against the replication of both virus types. This study justiﬁed the
use of calamus as an anti-herpes agent (Badam, 1995).

In bronchial asthma
A preliminary report on the clinical trial has been given by Rajasekharan and Srivastava
(1977).

In heart diseases
When vacha was used for three months in ischaemic heart disease, Mamagain and
Singh (1994) observed an improvement in cases of chest pain, dyspnoea, reduced body
weight index, serum cholesterol, and in electrocardiograms.

As an anthelmintic
A polyherbal treatment, including 250 g Calamus powder, three times a day was
prescribed with Embelia ribes syrup (20 ml three times a day), Semecarpus oil (1 drop
twice daily for two days), followed by purgation using 250 mg Mallotus philippinensis
trichome powder twice daily, for two days, was highly effective against roundworm,
threadworm and hookworm. When vacha was used alone, it was only effective against
roundworm (Sharma et al. 1985).

Chemical studies
The root contains 1.5–3.5 per cent of yellow aromatic oil, mainly consisting of asarone
and β-asarone, eugenol, asaraldehyde, galangin, etc. The composition of the oil from
2n, 3n and 4n varieties differs and β-asarone content increases with ploidy. The oil
from the American 2n (diploid) race contains no asarone but in Indian varieties it is
very high (Evans, 1988). β-Asarone is related to myristicin, the active constituent of
nutmeg.
                                                                                       Vacha 287
Toxicological studies
β-asarone is a hepatocarcinogen, mutagen and has a chromosome damaging property.
Indian calamus oil fed to rats induced duodenal tumours (Bruneton, 1995).

References
Alankara Rao, G.S.J.G., Rajendra Prasad, Y. (1981) Antimicrobial property of Acorus calamus
   Linn. In vitro studies. Indian Perfumers, 15, 4–6.
Badam, I. (1995) In vitro studies on the effect of Acorus calamus extract and beta–asarone on
   Herpes viruses. Deerghayu International, 11, 16–18.
Bruneton, J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal Plants. Lavoisier Publishing, Paris France
   1995.
Dasgupta, S.R., Patra, B.B., Sikdar, S. (1977) Preliminary studies of the effect of chloroform
   extracted factor from Acorus calamus on the behaviour of conscious rhesus monkeys. Science
   and Culture, 43, 218–219.
Evans, W.C. Trease and Evan’s Pharmacognosy. 18 Edition., Baillier and Tindall, London 1988.
Keller, K., Odenthal, K.P., Leng Peschlow, E. (1985) Spasmolytic activity of iso asorone from
   Calamus. Planta Medica, 51, 6–9.
Khare, A.K., Sharma, M.K. (1982) Experimental evaluation of antiepileptic activity of acorus
   oil. Journal Scientiﬁc Research on Plants and Medicine, 3, 100–103.
Mamgian, P., Singh, R. H. (1994) Controlled clinical trial of the Lekhaniya drug vaca (Acorus
   calamus) in cases of ischaemic heart diseases. Journal for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 15,
   35–51.
Martis, G., Rao, A., Karanth, K.S. (1991) Neuropharmacological activity of Acorus calamus.
   Fitoterpia, 62, 331–337.
Prasad, H.C., Chakraborty, R. Acorus calamus Linn- A medicinal plant having hypotensive
   activity in experimental study. International Seminar -Traditional Medicine, Calcutta, 7–9
   November 1992, p. 157.
Rafatullah, S., Tariq, M., Mossa, J.S., Al-Yahya, M.A., Al-Said, M.S., Ageel, A.M. (1994)
   Anti-secretagogue, anti-ulcer and cytoprotective properties of Acorus calamus in rats. Fitoterapia,
   65, 19–23.
Rajagopalan, V. Effect of Ayushman-2 in Manasa Mandata (mental retardation). Seminar on
   Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, CCRAS, New Delhi, P 34, 20–22 March 1995.
Rajasekharan, S., Srivastava, P.N. (1977) Ethnobotanical study on vacha and its preliminary
   clinical trial in bronchial asthma. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, Yoga and Homoeo-
   pathy, 12, 92–96.
Ratsch, Christian Plants of Love. The History of Aphrodisiacs and a Guide to their Identiﬁcation and
   Use. Ten Speed Press, Berkeley CA, USA 1997.
Sharma, R.D., Chaturvedi, C., Tewari, P.V. (1985) Helminthiasis in children and its treatment
   with indigenous drugs. Ancient Science of Life, 4, 245–247.
Siddiqui, M.T.A., Asif, M. Anti-inﬂammatory activity of Acorus calamus Linn (Abstract). Con-
   ference of Pharmacology and Symposium on Herbal drugs, New Delhi (India), 15 March 1991.
Vohora, S.B., Shah, S.A., Dandiya, P.C. (1990) Central nervous system studies on ethanol
   extract of Acorus calamus rhizome. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 28, 53–62.
Vohora, S.B., Shah, S.A., Sharma, K., Naqvi, S.A.H., Dandiya, P.C. (1989) Antibacterial,
   antipyretic, analgesic and antiinﬂammatory studies on Acorus calamus Linn. Annals of the
   National Academy of Medical Sciences (India), 25, 13–20.
Zanoli, P., Avallone, R., Baraldi, M. (1997) Sedative and hypothermic effects induced by beta
   asarone, a main component of Acorus calamus. Procedings of the Second International Symposium on
   Natural Drugs, Maratea, Italy, 28 Sept.,–1 Oct., 1997. (edited by Capasso, F., Pasquale, R.,
   Evans, F.J., Mascolo, N.J. (1998) Phytotherapy Research, 12 Supp. S114–116).
288 Vacha
Zhang, Y.X., Saito, H., Nishiyama, N. (1994) Improving effects of DX- 9386, a traditional
  Chinese medicinal prescription on thymectomy-induced impairment of learning behaviour
  in mice. Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 17, 1199–1205.
Zhou Daxing, Li Changyu, Lin Qinnliang (1992) Facilitatory effects of Acorus gramineus on
  learning and memory in mice. Traditional and Herbal Drugs, 2, 417– 419.
                                                                       Vata Vriksh 289

53 Vata Vriksh




    Ficus benghalensis L. (It is sometimes wrongly spelt as F. bengalensis)
    F. religiosa L.
    Family: Moraceae

Both these trees along with other Ficus spp. are sometimes used for the same purposes.

Ficus benghalensis


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is a native of the Himalayan and south Indian mountainous regions, but has been
introduced as a sacred, shady tree in most parts of India, along village ponds or in
community centres. It covers a vast tract of land by spreading its branches and by its
prop roots, which hang from it and touch the soil to establish connections with it. As
the tree ages, more and more branches and hanging roots arise. Leaves (Fig. 46B) are
waxy, thick and leathery. Young buds are pink in colour. The fruit is red, enclosing
numerous small seeds.
   It appears that earlier, in Indian villages, businessmen (called banya) used to display
their shop wares under the shade of this tree and at that time Englishmen named the
tree after them, the banyan tree.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

In earlier Sanskrit literature, the tree has been considered on a par with soma (p. 262)
in its effect. All parts of the tree, bark, root, latex and fruits were used. Fruits and
young hanging roots were considered food for the elite to improve their memory
power. For this purpose, banyan bark was dried in the shade, pulverized and mixed
with double the quantity of sugar candy. Great importance was attached to the latex
(called milk). It was considered rejuvenating, a stimulant and nourishing. It was
collected from the tree by making a pit-like depression at the base of a large branch
after sunset. The mouth of the pit was closed with a lump of raw sugar. Before sunrise,
in the morning, the latex was collected in a vessel.
   The other uses of the tree are as follows:
290 Vata Vriksh




Figure 46 A Ficus religiosa, twig, B F. benghalensis, twig.


For sexual inadequacies
1   Pulverize dry tender shoots and hanging roots. Take a pinch of this powder at
    regular intervals for spermatorrhoea.
2   Macerate opium and nutmeg in the latex of the banyan tree. Four to ﬁve drops
    of this mixture on ﬂat sugar candy helps premature ejaculation and nocturnal
    emission.
3   A decoction of banyan tree bark along with the other nourishing substances is said
    to have good effect on retention, quality and quantity of semen.
4   Six grams of the pulverized powder of twigs dried in shade, mixed with an equal
    quantity of sugar candy, when taken for seven days with 250–500 ml of milk ﬁrst
    thing in the morning, thickens the semen and helps burning micturition.
5   The leaves also have a beneﬁcial effect on human regenerative powers.
6   Unripe fruits dried in the shade, ground well and drunk are said to augment the
    urge for sex.
                                                                        Vata Vriksh 291
7    Fry 600 mg of asafoetida in ghee and mix one teaspoon of honey and one of Ficus
     benghalensis latex. Take this mixture twice daily for 40 days for impotence.

Contraindication
Do not use any sour or acidic things during treatment with this herb. Untoward
thoughts should not arise in the patient’s mind.

Ficus religiosa


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

The tree grows wild in the forests of central India and Bengal but has been introduced
in most parts of India as a sacred tree, where it is known as peepal. It is a spreading tree
with cordate, acuminate, glabrous leaves (Fig. 46A). The fruits are small and enclose
several seeds. The fruit is edible and is slightly sweet in taste.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

The decoction of the bark is considered cooling in effect (shitavirya, shit is cold
and virya effect) and is prescribed in cases of sexual inadequacies and nervous
debility which are supposed to have originated due to hotness in the body. The main
uses are:

As a Rasayana
On the ﬁrst day take 3 small peepal leaves and boil them in 125 ml milk and 125 ml
water. On the next day increase the number of leaves to six and prescribe them as they
were given on the ﬁrst day. Increase the dose by three leaves every day until a dose of
30 leaves per day is attained. After this, follow the treatment in a descending order
until a dose of three leaves a day is reached. This treatment is considered a Rasayana
in its effect and is said to bring about changes in the vital ﬂuid (dhatu parivartana) of
the body, which is useful in cases of paralysis, chronic coughs and other chronic
diseases.

For sexual inadequacies
a) Boil 500 g of tender twigs in 4 litres of water until the quantity of water is
   reduced to 500 ml. Cool and ﬁlter this decoction and add 2 kg sugar to make a
   linctus. Take 30 g of this linctus daily along with 250 ml milk, 60 g butter and
   sugar candy, according to taste.
b) Take one part of fresh green leaves and 8 parts of water. Crush the leaves and boil
   them in water, until the water is reduced to one-fourth. Filter, concentrate the
   decoction and add an equal quantity of sugar to it until a solid mass is obtained.
   Make pills of 60 mg each. The dose is 2–3 pills twice daily.
292 Vata Vriksh
As a tonic for the nervous system
1   Dry fresh peepal bark in the shade, and pulverize it. Take this powder with milk
    and sugar. This increases memory and strengthens the nervous system. It is a
    brain tonic for weak memory and mental confusion.
2   In nervous debility, cook 120 g of young tender twigs, in half a litre of cow’s milk
    three to four times. On cooling, strain the milk through cheesecloth. Add sugar
    candy to it as per taste and drink.
3   For insanity, boil 2–3 tender leaves in about 100 ml milk until the milk condenses.
    Add sugar according to taste.
4   For spasms and convulsion in children that arise due to involuntary muscle con-
    traction, prepare a ﬁne powder of the tree’s hanging roots and mix it with an equal
    quantity of saffron. Give 60–120 mg of this mixture at half-hour intervals.

For syphilis
Take the young bud or bark after boiling it in milk.

As a healing agent
The decoction of bark is an astringent and is quite effective for healing wounds, ulcers,
etc.

For psychoneurotic diseases
In cases of hysteria, emotional instability, intense craving, affections and wild emo-
tions, etc., take 25 g of tender hanging roots, cut and pound them and add 12 g each
of Nardostachys jatamansi (N. grandiﬂora), nutmeg, and 1.5 g musk. Macerate the whole
mass in a blender and, when homogenous, make pills of 100 mg each. Prescribe one to
four pills, thrice daily for four months. Avoid tension and hot food.

Ayurvedic preparation

Peepalavleh

Method Take one part of panchang of peepal (ﬁve parts of tree, i.e. the root bark, leaves,
fruit, tender shoots and ﬁbrous hanging roots) and 16 parts of water. Macerate the
herb in water and boil until reduced to one-fourth. Filter this decoction and dry the
ﬁltrate further until a thick paste is formed. Make pills of 250 mg each from this
extract and wrap each pill in a piece of silver foil.

Dose 1–2 pills are to be taken with milk at night.

Use These pills are said to be effective in all cases of nervous debility, mental confusion
and mild insanity.
                                                                     Vata Vriksh 293
THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES OF F. benghalensis AND F. religiosa

Anti-diabetic effects
Neera Singh et al. (1992) observed that alcohol extract of F. benghalensis bark showed
signiﬁcant hypoglycaemic activity. It reduced levels of serum cholesterol and blood
urea. Cherian and Augusti (1993) noted anti-diabetic activity in glycoside leucope-
largonidin isolated from F. benghalensis. It demonstrated hypoglycaemic, hypolipidemic
and serum insulin-raising levels in diabetic rats. It signiﬁcantly enhanced the faecal
secretion of sterols and bile acids. Vinod Kumar and Augusti (1993) showed that it
had an insulin sparing action. Augusti et al. (1994) conﬁrmed that the leucopelargonidin
derivative showed signiﬁcant hypoglycaemic and serum insulin-raising action in nor-
mal as well as in moderately diabetic dogs. Cherian and Augusti (1995) identiﬁed the
effective compound as dimethyl ether of leucopelargonidin (3-o-alpha-L-rhamnoside).
A low dose of insulin in combination with this compound maintained body weight,
controlled urine blood sugar and ameliorated serum cholesterol and triglycerides.

Anti-diarrhoeal effect
The extract of F. benghalensis hanging roots and F. racemosa bark had an inhibitory
effect against castor oil-induced diarrhoea. These extracts brought a reduction in
gastrointestinal motility (Mukherjee et al. 1998).

Antioxidant effect
Daniel et al. (1998) isolated quercetin and polyphenolic ﬂavonoids from the bark of F.
benghalensis and evaluated their antioxidant action in hyperlipidaemic rats. These com-
pounds showed a signiﬁcant antioxidant effect and lowered serum lipids (cholesterol,
phospholipids, triacylglycerols and free fatty acids).

Antigastroduodenal ulcer effects
A water decoction of F. religiosa bark protected the animals against induced gastric
and duodenal ulcers (Bipul De, 1997).

Hypocholesterolaemic effect
Shukla et al. (1995) fed the water extract of F. benghalensis bark with cholesterol to
rabbits. The bark extract not only prevented the elevation of serum cholesterol but
brought its level down. There was an improvement in other parameters of lipid
proﬁles. Daniel et al. (1998) conﬁrmed this activity.

For leucorrhoea
Three grams of F. benghalensis bark, when administered ﬁve times a day for 30 days
gave relief to patients with leucorrhoea (Sannd and Krishan Kumari, 1992).
294 Vata Vriksh
Anti-tumour activity
The fruit extracts of F. religiosa and F. benghalensis exhibited anti-tumour and anti-
bacterial activity (Mousa, 1994).

Toxicological studies
The leucopelargonidin derivatives did not show any toxic effects when administered
for one month and and were not lethal, even at the high dose of 1.8 g/kg (Augusti et
al. 1994).

References
Augusti, K.T., Daniel, R.S., Cherian, S., Sheela, C.G., Sudhakaran Nair, C.R. (1994) Effect of
  leucopelargonin derivative from Ficus bengalensis Linn on diabetic dogs. Indian Journal of
  Medical Research, 99, 82–86.
Bipul De, Maiti, R.N., Joshi, V.K., Agrawal, V.K., Goel, R.K. (1997) Effect of some Sitavirya
  drugs on gastric secretion and ulceration. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 35, 1084–
  1087.
Cherian, S., Augusti, K.T. (1993) Antidiabetic effects of a glycoside of leucopelargonidin
  isolated from Ficus bengalensis Linn. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 31, 26–29.
Cherian, S., Augusti, K.T. (1995) Insulin sparing action of leucopelargonidin derivatives iso-
  lated from Ficus bengalensis Linn. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 33, 608–611.
Daniel, R.S., Mathew, B.C., Devi, K.S., Augusti, K.T. (1998) Antioxidant effect of two
  ﬂavonoids from the bark of Ficus bengalensis Linn in hyperlipidemic rats. Indian Journal of
  Experimental Biology, 36, 902–906.
Mandal, S.C., Maity, T.K., Das, J., Saha, B.P., Pal, M. (1998) Ficus racemosa affords
  antihepatotoxic activity against paracetamol-induced acute liver damage in rats. Natural
  Product Sciences, 43, 174–179.
Mousa, O., Vuorela, P., Kiviranta, J., Abdel Wahab, S., Hiltunen, R., Vuorela, H. (1994)
  Bioactivity of certain Egyptian Ficus species. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 41, 71–76.
Mukherjee, P.K., Saha, K., Murugesan, T., Mandal, S.C., Pal, M., Saha, B.P. (1998) Screening
  of anti-diarrhoeal proﬁle of some plant extracts of a speciﬁc region of West Bengal, India.
  Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 60, 85–89.
Neera Singh, Tyagi, S.D., Agarwal, S.C. (1992) Study of antidiabetic effects of alcoholic extract
  of Ficus bengalensis (Linn.) on alloxan diabetic albino rats. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and
  Siddha, 13, 56–62.
Sannd, B.N., Krishna Kumari (1992) A preliminary clinical trial of Vatavrakasha Curna on
  Svetapardara. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 13, 82–88.
Shukla, R., Anand, K., Parbhu, K.M., Murthy, S. (1995) Hypocholesterolemic effect of water
  extract of the bark of banyan tree, Ficus bengalensis. Indian Journal of Clinical Biochemistry, 10,
  14–18.
Vinod Kumar, R., Augusti, K.T. Insulin sparing activity of a leucocyanidin derivative isolated
  from Ficus bengalensis Linn. Amala Research Bulletin, 13 August, 1993, pp. 32–36.
                                                                           Vatsnabh 295

54 Vatsnabh




    Aconitum spp.
    Family: Ranunculaceae


THE PLANTS AND THEIR DISTRIBUTION

The plants, which yield aconite (vatsnabh of Ayurveda) grow in the alpine Himalayas.
Earlier botanists identiﬁed these as Aconitum napellus L., but this identiﬁcation was
erroneous. The Indian aconites, which can be the source of vatsnabh, have been iden-
tiﬁed by Puri (1974a). The names of these, along with their natural distribution in
India, are as follows: Aconitum deinorrhizum Stapf South Kashmir, A. falconeri Stapf
Garhwal, A. balfourii Stapf Grahwal to Nepal, A. ferox Wall. ex Seringe, A. spicatum
Stapf, and A. laciniatum Stapf, in Singalila Range, Darjeeling.
   These plants are herbs, usually about 1 metre tall, but some plants of A. spicatum
(Fig. 47A) may grow taller. The ﬂowers are generally blue with a characteristic hood
(Fig. 47B) and nectaries (Fig. 47C). The roots of these plants are characteristic (Fig. 47D)
in that the mother tuber gives rise to the plant as well as to a daughter tuber (Fig.
47E). As the plant grows, the mother tuber shrivels due to nutrient depletion and the
daughter tuber develops with an apical bud at the top. Puri (1975) provides a detailed
botanical description of Indian aconites.
   Aconite is one of the oldest herbs known to Indian physicians. It is a component
of many Chinese preparations and in Tibet it is known as ‘king of medicine’ (Puri,
1974b). The poisonous nature of aconite is well known to Indians where the plant grows
and they call it vish or bikh, which means poison. Earlier it was used as an arrow poison.
   In the nineteenth century a root known as Jadwar Khatai, considered an antidote to
poisons and sold at the price of gold, was much in demand. The British East India
Company became interested in it as the source of a commercial commodity. On the
basis of organoleptic characteristics it looked like some aconites, so Stapf was deputed
by the East India Company to investigate the source of this precious herb, resulting in
a monograph on Indian aconites (Stapf, 1905).
   The dry roots of vatsnabh are brownish and horn-like (Fig. 47F), 6–12 cm long and
2–4 cm broad. The internal colour of the tuber may be off-white to brown to black.
The fracture is horny and, on breaking the tuber, star-like cambium is visible. The
root is starchy, has no smell but causes a tingling sensation when applied to the tip of
the tongue. (Caution: it is very poisonous.) Since black aconite fetches a higher price,
sometimes the off-white or brown aconite roots are boiled in ferrous sulphate dissolved
296 Vatsnabh




    Figure 47 Aconitum spicatum A twig, B hood of ﬂowers, C nectaries under hood,
              D fresh root, daughter and mother tuber joined together, E fresh root,
              F dry root, G treated root.


in cow’s urine to give the root a black colour (Fig. 47G). Pharmacognostic details on
these aconites are described by Mehra and Puri (1970).
   Aconite is one of the major nine poisons known in Ayurveda. For medicinal purposes
it is used after mitigation by breaking the root into pea-sized pieces. These pieces are
immersed in a pot containing cow’s urine and the pot is kept in sunlight throughout
                                                                          Vatsnabh 297
the day. Next day the old urine is discarded and replaced with fresh. This process is
repeated three times and the root pieces are dried for future use. Sometimes the roots
are boiled in cow’s urine, instead of giving the above treatment.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

According to Ayurveda, vatasnabh after mitigation is hot and bitter but, if used in a
proper way, it is a good Rasayana with anti-tridosha effects, mainly against vata and
kapha. It increases internal ﬁre (agni) within the body. It is an analgesic, anti-pyretic,
cardiotonic and an anti-inﬂammatory agent. Earlier it was recommended in acute
stages of venereal diseases, but now it is only used to a limited extent due to the lack
of safety in therapeutic doses. As given by Puri (1974b) the various uses of mitigated
aconites, at a dose of 7.5–15 mg, are as follows:

Anti-pyretic, anti-periodic and diaphoretic
It is used in various types of fevers.

For respiratory problems
Mainly used for asthma, where it provides good relief.

As a cardiotonic
For blood pressure problems, it is used as an hypotensive agent. It is a heart and nerve
sedative and prevents heart palpitations. After mitigation in the Ayurvedic way, the
roots lose their depressant action on the heart and develop a stimulating effect.

As a mental and physical tonic
It is prescribed as an aphrodisiac, particularly for involuntary urination and seminal
ejaculation.

As an anodyne
It is used for neuralgia, trifacial neuralgia and rheumatism. It has a signiﬁcant anti-
inﬂammatory activity. In western pharmacopoeias, a preparation containing aconite,
belladonna and chloroform was earlier very popular and applied externally to relieve pain.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

General studies
Singh et al. (1985) studied the pharmacology of mitigated aconite for cardiotonic,
analgesic, anti-pyretic and anti-inﬂammatory activity. The aconite showed all these
activities and was not cardiotoxic. In another study Murayama et al. (1991) observed
298 Vatsnabh
that processed aconite contained pyro-type alkaloids. These alkaloids had an analgesic
and anti-inﬂammatory effect but were low in toxicity.

Cardiotonic effects
According to Dong and Chen (1995) the alkaloid showed therapeutic and prophylactic
effects on different models of experimental arrhythmia without causing a marked
effect on myocardial contractility.

Anti-cancerous property
The aconite extract increased the secretion of interlukin-1β tumour necrosis factor α
and interleukin-6 in human mononuclear cells (Chang et al. 1994).

Chemical studies
The roots may contain 0.4–1.85 per cent of diterpenoid alkaloids, which resemble
aconitine isolated from A. napellus. Some of the well known alkaloids from Indian
aconites are bikhaconitine, pseudaconitine, aconitine, bishatisine and bishaconitine.
Out of these pseudaconitine is the most toxic, bikhaconitine and indaconitine are
more active than aconitine (Mehra and Puri, 1970).

Toxicological studies
POISONOUS and if used in excess of the prescribed dose it stops the heart.

References
Chang, J.G., Shih, P.P., Chang, C.P., Chang, J.Y., Wang, F.Y., Tseng, J. (1994) The stimulat-
   ing effect of radix aconiti extract on cytokines secretion by human mononuclear cells. Planta
   Medica, 60, 576–578.
Dong, Y.L., Chen, W.Z. (1995) Effect of Guan-Fu base A on experimental cardiac arrhythmias
   and myocardial contractility. Pharmeceutica Sinica 30, 577–582.
Mehra, P.N., Puri, H.S. (1970) Pharmacognostic investigations on aconites of Ferox group.
   Research Bulletin of the Panjab University (N.S.) 21, 473– 493.
Murayama, M., Mori, T., Bando, H., Amiya, T. (1991) Studies on the constituents of Aconitum
   species. IX. The pharmacological properties of pyro type aconitine alkaloids, component of
   processed aconite powder Kako-bushimastu, analgesic, antiinﬂammatory and acute toxic ac-
   tivities. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 35, 159–164.
Puri, H.S. (1974a) Distribution of aconites in India. Journal of Research in Indian Medicine, 9,
   41– 43.
Puri, H.S. (1974b) Uses of aconites. Journal d’Agriculture Tropicale et de Botanique Appliquée, 21,
   239–246.
Puri, H.S. (1975) Botanical studies on aconites. Herba Hungarica, 14, 123–133.
Stapf, O. (1905) The aconites of India. A monograph. Annals Royal Botanical Gardens, Calcutta
   (India), 10, 115–119.
Singh, L.B., Singh, R.S., Bose, R., Sen, S.P. (1985) Studies on the pharmacological action of
   aconite in the form used in Indian medicine. Bulletin Medico Ethnobotanical Research, 6, 115–
   123.
                                                                           Vibhitaki 299

55 Vibhitaki




    Terminalia bellirica (Gaertn.) Roxb.
    Syn. T. belerica Roxb.
    Family: Combretaceae


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is a deciduous tree commonly known by the name bahera. It may grow up to 30 m
in height. It grows throughout India except on very dry and marshy land. The leaves
(Fig. 48A) are elliptic or broadly elliptic, obovate up to 7.5 cm long, crowded towards
the end of the branches. Flowers are light greenish yellow, 1.25 cm across and have an
offensive odour. The fruit (Fig. 48B) is a drupe, grey to light violet and 2–5 cm long.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

In Ayurveda, negative virtues are attributed to this tree, and the fruit is rarely used
alone. In folklore, the unripe fruit is considered a laxative and the mature fruit an
astringent. The fruit powder (2–10 g) is used for coughs, throat problems, fevers,
and in gastroenteritis. The seed kernel is said to have analgesic, anti-inﬂammatory,
aphrodisiac and narcotic effect. The seed oil is applied as a hair tonic. It is purgative,
like castor oil. The fruit of this tree is one of the three ingredients of a very common
Ayurvedic preparation Triphala.


THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

An astringent, tonic, laxative and antipyretic effect have been seen in vibhitaki by Nandi
et al. (1975), which may be of use for dropsy and leprosy. The other studies are as follows:

Anti-microbial properties
Four compounds isolated from the fruit exhibited anti HIV-1 activity, anti-malarial
activity against Plasmodium falciparum, anti-fungal activity against Penicillium expansum
and Candida albicans in vitro (Raghvan et al. 1997).
300 Vibhitaki




    Figure 48 Terminalia bellirica A twig, B fruit.


Anti-diabetic activity
When Siddiqui (1961) injected ethanol extract, equivalent to one gram of dry fruit,
intraperitonially into rabbits, it reduced blood sugar levels.

Hepatoprotective activity
Siddiqui (1963) found that it stimulated bile secretion. The fruit exhibited a signiﬁcant
hepatoprotective effect in a dose-dependent manner. A fraction of the fruit extract was
                                                                                 Vibhitaki 301
tried on experimentally-induced hepatic injury in rats. The results were encouraging;
it had both prophylactic and curative properties (Anand et al. 1994).

Anti-tussive and anti-asthmatic activity
The fruit exhibited bronchodilator, antispasmodic and anti-asthmatic effects. Trivedi
et al. (1982) treated 93 cases of asthma using this fruit, 22 patients showed complete
relief, in 22 cases there was a signiﬁcant relief and in 35 cases there was moderate
relief. It was effective in tropical pulmonary eosinophilia, with less relapse (Abhimanyu
Kumar et al. 1994).

For myocardial necrosis
Tariq et al. (1977) used it along with amalaki.

Anti-mutagenic effect
The polyphenols isolated from the fruit showed this effect on Salmonella tymphimurium
(Padam et al. 1966).

Anti-uraemic activity
Yokozawa et al. (1995) conﬁrmed that tannins in the fruit have a uraemic decreasing
effect.

Chemical studies
The fruit contains 21.4 per cent of both condensed and hydrolyzable tannins. Of these
the important ones are gallic acid, ellagic acid and epigalates. In addition to these,
saponins, nitrogenous crystalline principle phyllembin and a cardiac glycoside have
also been isolated (Thakur et al. 1989).

Toxicological studies
It is very safe. No toxicity was seen, even up to a dose of 3.3 g/kg (Anand et al. 1994).

References
Abhimanyu Kumar (1994) Role of certain Ayurvedic herbal drugs in management of T.P.E. in
  children. Indian Medicine, 44, 5–10.
Anand, K.K., Singh, B., Saxena, A.K., Chandan, B.K., Gupta, V.N. (1994) Hepatoprotective
  studies of a fraction from the fruits of Terminlia belerica Roxb. on experimental liver injury in
  rodents. Phytotherapy Research, 8, 287–292.
Nandi, M., Sharma, R.C., Gupta, S.K., Arora, R.B. (1975) Chemical and Biological assay of
  Terminalia belerica Roxb. – A comparative study of three samples. Journal of Research in Indian
  Medicine, 10, 27–36.
Padam. S.K., Grover, I.S., Majar Singh (1996) Antimutagenic effects of polyphenols isolated
  from Terminalia bellerica myroblan in Salmonella typhimurium. Indian Journal of Experimental
  Biology, 34, 98–102.
302 Vibhitaki
Raghavan, V., Pushpagandan, P., Smitt, U.W., Andersewn, A., Christensen, S.B., Sittie, A.,
   Nyman, U., Nileson, C., Olsen, C.E. (1997) New anti-HIV-1, antimalarial, and antifungal
   compounds from Terminalia bellerica. Journal of Natural Products, 60, 739–742.
Siddiqui, H.H. (1961) Studies on Terminalia belerica Roxb. Indian Journal of Pharmacy, 25, 297.
Siddiqui, H.H. (1963) Studies on Terminalia belerica Roxb. Effect on bile secretion and
   pharmacodynamic properties. Indian Journal of Pharmacy, 27, 297–302.
Tariq, M., Hussain, S.J., Asif, M., Jahan, M. (1977) Protective effects of fruit extracts of
   Emblica ofﬁcinalis (Gaertn.) and Terminalia belerica Roxb., in experimental myocardial necrosis
   in rats. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 5, 485– 486.
Thakur, R.S., Puri, H.S., Akhtar Hussain Major Medicinal of Plants of India. CIMAP, Lucknow
   India 1989.
Trivedi, V.P., Nesamany, S., Sharma, V.K. (1982) A clinical study of the antitussive and
   antiasthmatic effects of Vibhitakaphal Churna (Terminalia belerica Roxb.) in the cases of
   Kasa-Swasa. Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Sidha. 3, 1–8.
Yokozawa, T., Fujioka, K., Oura, H., Tanaka, T., Nonaka, G., Nishioka, I. (1995) Conﬁrma-
   tion that tannin containing crude drugs have a uraemic decreasing action. Phytotherapy
   Research, 9, 1–5.
                                                                        Vidari Kand     303

56 Vidari Kand




    Pueraria tuberosa (Roxb. Ex Willd.) DC
    Family: Fabaceae (Leguminose )


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It is a liana (Fig. 49A), found in sub-arid zones of India. The main tuber is like a big
turnip and, in the soil, may be followed by smaller and smaller tubers in a chain. The
tuber is brownish from the outside and dirty-white to pale yellow inside, which on
drying may be thick on the outside, but with a ﬂake-like structure inside or may be
in the form of a barrel shape, in pieces 25–50 cm long and 25 cm thick. These dry
papery wafers (Fig. 49B) have a liquorice-like taste. In south India, tubers of other plants,
such as Ipomoea digitata, pith of Cycas and sometimes palms are considered vidar kand.
In many instances in Ayurvedic literature, vidari kand has been identiﬁed as I. digitata.

USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA
As per Ayurveda, it is a good nutrient, energizer, boosts vital energy and is an
aphrodisiac. It is sweet in ras, a galactagogue, spermatogenic, cooling, greasy, diuretic
and effective against all the three kaphas, calming burning sensations in the body. It is
advisable to use it in cold areas or in cold weather. It is mainly used in the form of a
ﬁne powder for the following purposes;

As a galactagogue
For a lack of milk after childbirth, 5 g of powder is given to mothers in cow’s milk.

As an anabolic agent
A weak child is given 2 g of powder with milk for digestion. For additional beneﬁts,
2 g of peepali powder may be given along with it.

For digestive problems
Six grams of powder with ghee and sugar is given twice daily for enlargement of the
liver and spleen.
304 Vidari Kand




   Figure 49 Pueraria tuberosa A twig, B pieces of tuber.
                                                                     Vidari Kand    305
For excessive menstruation
Six grams of powder is used twice daily with honey.

For sexual debility
Fry crushed wheat or barley in ghee and add milk, honey, sugar and vidari powder to it.

For spermatorrhoea
1 Take pulverized vidari dried in its own juice and add almond, quince seed, clove,
cardamom, nutmeg, satavari, kawanch and sugar. Take 6 g of this powder with milk.
2 Take juice of fresh root with cumin and sugar.

In Chinese traditional medicine
In the book written by Li Shih Chen in 1578, Pueraria lobata root (kudzu or ko for) has
been mentioned for relieving thirst, for febrile conditions, as an anti-emetic, anti-
toxic, for colds, snake bites and to counter the effect of excessive alcohol. It is said
to help hypertension, stiffness of the neck, lack of perspiration, migraines, angina
pectoris, hypoglycaemia and arterial diseases. For treating sudden deafness, alcohol
extract of the tuber is prescribed, whilst for neck stiffness and hypertension a decoc-
tion is used.
   Earlier P. thomsonii was used in China but P. lobata has been found to be richer in
the active constituents, isoﬂavones. The tubers of these two species can be easily
differentiated by their internal characters. Whereas the root of P. thomsonii is white
due to the starch, P. lobata is yellow due to an excess of ﬁbres. (It appears that tubers
of P. thomsonii resemble that of P. tuberosa.)

Ayurvedic preparations

Maharasayana yoga

Method Pulverized vidari tuber is saturated with the fresh juice of vidari and dried.
This process is repeated 21 times and the powder is dried completely. If the fresh juice
is not readily available, a decoction can be prepared by boiling coarse vidari powder in
eight times as much water until water is reduced to one-fourth. After ﬁltration, use
this decoction in place of the juice.

Dose 5–10 g.

Use An immunostimulant which increases the strength, power and sexual capacity in
males.
306 Vidari Kand
THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS AND PHARMACOLOGICAL
STUDIES

As an anti-inﬂammatory agent
The peeled root, bruised into a cataplasm, reduced swelling. It was crushed
and rubbed on the body for fevers and rheumatism. Nikam et al. (1977) isolated a
steroidal neuromuscular blocking agent from the root. It was fully reversible, indicat-
ing that steroids act as an anti-depolarizing agent. Lee et al. (1994) studied the anti-
inﬂammatory activity of ﬂavonoids daidzein and puerarin. Both showed signiﬁcant
anti-inﬂammatory activity. Cho and Kim (1985) studied the product Galgumn-tang for
anti-inﬂammatory and analgesic action. This product mainly consisted of P. thunbergiana
and showed remarkable inhibition of inﬂammation.

For nervous diseases
Xiuxian and Xuiquin (1979) found that Radix puerarie was effective in 83 per cent of
migraine cases. Shen et al. (1996) reported that the ﬂavones from the root are antagon-
ists or weak partial agonists of the benzodiazepine receptor.

For heart problems
Fan et al. (1985) carried out a pharmacological study on radix puerariae for acute
regional myocardial ischaemia. It decreased the mean arterial pressure without de-
creasing the collateral coronary blood ﬂow. Fang (1980) found that 100 mg of total
isoﬂavones cured 90 per cent of hypertensive cases, 80 per cent of angina pectoris
cases and 92 per cent of migraine cases. In the treatment of hypertension, total
isoﬂavins injected into the carotid artery were capable of dilating the cerebral blood
ﬂow. It may be due to improved cerebral circulation that patients suffering hyper-
tension, from migraines, and sudden deafness received relief. These compounds lowered
catecholamine levels, decreased the oxygen supply and depressed lactic acid produc-
tion by the oxygen-deﬁcient heart muscles in angina pectoris. The compounds were
not effective orally as they were destroyed in the body.

As an anti-spasmodic
Shibata et al. (1959) studied ﬂavonoids and anthraquinones from P. hirsuata syn.
P. lobata. They showed anti-spasmodic properties.

For gynaecological problems
It had emmenagogue, signiﬁcant oestrogenic and progesteronogenic activities with no
toxicity. The alcoholic extract was highly effective in dysmenorrhoea, dysfunctional
uterine bleeding and in menopausal syndrome. Patients resistant to routine hormonal
therapy responded remarkably to this treatment (Chandhoke et al. p.c.). Shukla et al.
(1996) found that butanol extract had an oestrogenic mode of action. It increased
glycogen content, protein concentration and total cholesterol in the reproductive organs
of ovariectomized rats.
                                                                        Vidari Kand    307
   Khurana et al. (1996) studied the effect of a herbal galactagogue containing Leptadenia,
fennel, Glycyrrhiza, Pueraria, Asparagus and cumin on the milk yield of lactating
buffaloes. The preparation resulted in a signiﬁcant increase in milk yield. The result
was evident within seven days of treatment and was sustained for 35 days.

In alcoholism (antidipsotropic agent)
Keung and Vallee (1993) observed that the active constituents of the root, daidzin and
daidzein, suppressed free-choice alcohol intake by Syrian golden hamsters. Overstreet
et al. (1993) carried out further research. Keung et al. (1996) compared the effect of
pure daidzin with that of crude daidzin contained in the methanol extract of the root,
and concluded that this effect is not due to daidzin alone, but to the joint action of
both isoﬂavone constituents daidzin and daidzein (Keung and Vallee, 1998).

Antioxidant effect
Sato et al. (1992) noted the antioxidant action of Pueraria isoﬂavonoids. These were
able to scavenge free radicals involved in lipid peroxidation initiation. Speroni et al.
(1996) conﬁrmed this antioxidant effect.

Hepatoprotective effect
Sohn et al. (1985) noted that in the case of cadmium toxicity P. thunbergiana butanol
extract had a diuretic and antidotal effect. Shukla et al. (1996) studied the protective
action of butanol extract of the root on carbon tetrachloride-induced hepatotoxicity in
rats. Treatment with P. tuberosa, seven days prior to administration of carbon tetra-
chloride protected rats against liver damage. Araro (1998) noted the preventive effects
of nine saponins, isolated from the root, on the liver in in vitro immunological liver
injury in primary cultured rat hepatocytes.

Chemical studies
Various isoﬂavones like puerarin, daidzein and daidzin have been reported.

Toxicological studies
Shukla (1995) studied in detail, the toxicity of the butanol extract of this tuber. Using
this treatment the concentration of serum GPT (glutamic purvic transaminase) and
GOT (glutamino oxaloacetic transaminase or aspartate transminase) were signiﬁc-
antly higher. Signiﬁcant changes were observed in the adrenal glands but there were
no histopathological or functional effects.

References
Araro, T., Udayama, M., Kinjo, J., Nohara, T. (1998) Preventive effects of saponins from the
  Pueraria lobata root on in vitro immunological liver injury of rat primary hepatocyte cul-
  tures. Planta Medica, 64, 413–415.
308 Vidari Kand
Cho, E.H., Kim, I.H. (1985) Studies on the concurrent administration of medicine. I Anti-
   inﬂammatory and analgesic action of Galgun-tang and aspirin. Korean Journal of Pharmacognosy,
   16, 7–11 (in Korean).
Fan, L., O’Keefe, D.D., Powel, W.J. Jr (1984) Effect of puerarin on regional myocardial blood
   ﬂow and cardiac haemodynamics in dogs with acute myocardial ischaemia. Acta Pharmaceutica.
   Sinica, 19, 801–807.
Fan, L., O’Keefe, D.D., Powell, W.J. Jr. (1985) Pharmacologic studies on radix puerariae.
   Effect of puerarin on regional myocardial blood ﬂow and cardiac hemodynamics in dogs with
   acute myocardial ischemia. Chinese Medical Journal, 98, 821–832.
Fang Qicheng (1980) Some current study and research approach relating to the use of plants in
   the traditional Chinese medicine. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 2, 57–63.
Furusawa, J., Nohara, T. (1987) New ingredients of Puerariae radix. Journal of Pharmaceutical
   Sciences, 76, p S 197.
Keung, W.M., Lazo, O., Kunze, L., Vallee, B.L. (1996) Potentiation of the bioavailability of
   diadzin by an extract of Radix puerariae. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA,
   93, 4284– 4288.
Keung, W.M., Vallee, B.L. (1993) Daidzin and daidzein suppress free choice ethanol intake by
   Syrian golden hamsters. Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences, USA, 90, 10008–10012.
Keung, W.M., Vallee, B.L. (1998) Kudzu root: an ancient Chinese source of modern
   antidipsotropic agents. Phytochemistry, 47, 499–506.
Khurana, K.L., Balvinder Kumar, Khanna, S., Manuja, A. (1996) Effect of herbal galactagogue
   Payapro on milk yield in lactating buffaloes. International Journal of Animal Sciences, 11, 239–
   240.
Nikam, S.T., Sonurlikar, U.A., Bhide, M.B. (1977) Steroidal neuromuscular blocking agent
   from Pueraria tuberosa. Indian Journal of Pharmacy, 39, 161.
Overstreet, D.H., Lee, Y.W., Rezvani, A.H., Criswell, H.E. Research Society on Alcoholism.
   Symposium Skipper Bowles Centre for Alcohol Studies, University of North Carolina, Chapel
   Hill, USA 1993.
Sato, T., Kawamoto, A., Tarsumi, Y., Fujii, T. (1992) Mechanism of antioxidant action of
   Pueraria glycoside (PG)-1 (an isoﬂavonoid) and mangiferin (a xanthonoid). Chemical and
   Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 40, 721–724.
Shen, X.L., Witt, M.R., Nielsen, M., Sterner, O. (1996) Inhibition of (3H) ﬂunitrazepam
   binding to rat brain membrane in vitro by puerarin and diadzein. Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica,
   31, 59–62.
Shibata, S.T., Murakami, Y., Haroda, M. (1959) The constituents of Pueraria root. Chemical
   and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 7, 134–136.
Shukla, Sangeeta (1995) Toxicological studies of Pueraria tuberosa, a potent antifertility plant.
   International Journal of Pharmacognosy, 33, 324–329.
Shukla, Sangeeta, Jonathan, S., Sharma, A. (1996) Protective action of butanolic extract of
   Pueraria tuberosa DC against carbon tetrachloride-induced hepatotoxicity in adult rats.
   Phytotherapy Research, 10, 608–609.
Sohn, D.H., Ann., H.S., Shin, S.D. (1985) Pharmacological effects of Puerarie radix butanol
   extract on cadmium toxicity in rats. Yakhak Hoeji, 29, 206–215.
Speroni, E., Guerra, M.C., Rossetti, A., Pozzeti, L., Sapone, A., Paolini, M., Cantelli-Forti, G.,
   Pasini, P., Roda, A. (1996) Anti-oxidant activity of Pueraria lobata (Willd.) in the rats.
   Proceedings of the VIII Congresso nazionale della Societa Italiana di Farmacognsia and 1st joint
   meeting of Belgian, Dutch, Spanish and Italian Research groups on Pharmacognosy, Napels, Italy,
   9–14th June 1996. Capasso, F., Evans, F.J., Mascolo, N. (eds.) Phytotherapy Research (Supple-
   ment 1), S 95–97.
Xiuxian, G., Xuiqin, L. (1979) Radix Puerariae in migraine. Chinese Medical Journal, 92, 260–
   262.
                                                                           Vidhara    309

57 Vidhara




    Argyreia speciosa Sweet
    Syn: A. nervosa (Bulm f.) Bojes
    Family: Convolvulaceae

In western countries, it is known as Baby Rosewood or Hawaiian Baby Rosewood.


THE PLANT AND ITS DISTRIBUTION

It mainly grows in deciduous forests but can be cultivated in warm climates. It is
a liana with big cordate leaves (Fig. 50A) and a twining stem, with greenish violet-
white ﬂowers. The fruit is globular, enclosing three seeds. Each seed (Fig. 50B) is
pyramidal in shape with a broad hilum.
   In India, the genuine seeds are known as bidhara beej asli and are hard to obtain.
These are very often substituted for similar types of seed of other members of
Convolvulaceae. The plant is also known as samunderphul.


USES IN FOLKLORE AND AYURVEDA

In Ayurvedic formulations, the genuine seed is rarely used and are often substituted by
the stem pieces of this plant, called vidhara root. It is considered an alterative, nervine
tonic, aphrodisiac and is an important constituent of many commercial aphrodisiac
preparations sold in India.
   One of these preparations, Ashwagandhadi Churn (p. 49), is made by pulverizing
equal quantities of vidhara stem with ashwagandha. Sometimes an equal quantity of
Hygrophila spinosa seed powder is also added to it. Another product is prepared by
soaking the pulverized root of Argyreia in Asparagus juice. After drying, when given in
a dose of 3–6 g with ghee, for a month, it is said to improve intellect, strengthens the
body and keeps old age away.
   A psychedelic product, Utopian Bliss Balls is prepared by taking 5 Argyreia seed, 1
pinch of ginseng, 1 pinch of gotu kola and 1 teaspoon bee pollen. The mixture is
stuffed into date palm pulp (Ratsch, 1997).
   The seed is mainly used for the extraction of lysergic acid compounds, d lysergic
acid amide and d isolysergic acid amide, both of which are closely related to LSD
(d-lysergic acid diethylamide) obtained from ergot, by ﬁrst extracting the seed with
310 Vidhara




Figure 50 Argyreia speciosa A twig, B seed.



petroleum ether and then with alcohol. A paste of 8–10 seeds, after removal of
seed coat, is said to have a good hallucinogenic effect. The results are more tranquil
than those induced by LSD. In some people it has a depressant effect whilst in others
it acts as an invigorating agent (from the internet, on the basis of some people’s
experience).

Chemical studies
It contains ergoline-type alkaloids, some of which are hallucinogenic. A seed contains
3 mg of ergoline and ergometrine (Chao and Dermarderosian, 1973, Agarwal and
Rastogi (1974), Wealth of India, 1985).
                                                                                   Vidhara     311
References
Agarwal, S.K., Rastogi, R.P. (1974) Ergometrine and other constituents of Argyreia speciosa
  Sweet. Indian Journal of Pharmacy, 36, 118–119.
Chao, J., Dermarderosian, A.H. (1973) Identiﬁcation of ergoline alkaloids in the genus Argyreia
  and related genera and their chemotaxonoimc implication in Convolvulacae. Phytochemistry,
  12, 2435–2440
Ratsch, Christian Plants of Love. The History of Aphrodisiacs and a Guide to their Identiﬁcation and
  Use. Ten Speed Press, Berkley, CA USA 1997.
Wealth of India Publication and Information Directorate, CSIR, New Delhi, India 1985.
312 Some Rasayana formulations

58 Some Rasayana formulations




Since ancient times, classical Ayurvedic texts have mentioned Rasayana formulations.
These have been manufactured all over the Indian subcontinent for several centuries
by learned vaidyas (physicians). The number of these formulations is so large that it is
not possible to list all of them. In recent times, many Ayurvedic physicians, using
their experience and keeping the need of the society in view, have developed more
Rasayana products which are sold under trade names. Today, Ayurvedic pharmacies
manufacture both classical preparations and trade name preparations. A selection of
these products is given here. The ﬁrst part consists of classical formulations, which are
manufactured under their Ayurvedic name, and the second part lists preparations
where trade names are used.


CLASSICAL FORMULATIONS

These have been selected from the Ayurvedic literature on the basis of their unique-
ness and popularity. In each formulation, the name of the ingredients and parts used
have been identiﬁed from the Sanskrit name and are listed in a table. The quantity of
each and the dose of the products have been converted into grams (approximately). On
the basis of information in the Sanskrit texts, a summary of the method of preparation
and uses of each product is given. As will be seen from these tables, quite a number
of minerals/gems/poisonous substances are included in these formulations. This was
probably done to potentiate the slow action of the herbs on the human system, or to
provide rare minerals to the body, or may have been a result of the feudal system of
society in mediaeval India, which had become so sophisticated that complex com-
pounds with precious and rare ingredients were the need of the hour. Most of these
compounds contained ambergris, saffron and musk, which are hard to ﬁnd even now.
Stress was laid on incorporation of inorganic compounds in organic forms. These com-
pounds, in formulations, are actually complex organo-metallic compounds prepared by
various tedious processes of treating minerals, etc. with many herbs, and subjecting
them to high temperatures, so that they turn ash-like (bhasama) and become partly
soluble in water for bioavailablity to the human system. In earlier English translations,
the term calcination was used for this process of treating minerals, etc., but, as later
discovered, it is not a simple process of heating raw materials but consists of subject-
ing them to various herbal treatments so the term, processed has been used in the
present text. Special mention may be made of red sulphide of mercury, which is used
extensively in Rasayana preparations. In Ayurveda there are two different processes for
                                                       Some Rasayana formulations        313
its manufacture. In one of the products, called Makardhawaj, gold is used as a catalyst,
while the other product, Ras Sindur, is manufactured without gold.

Amrit Rasayana

Ayurvedic name          Botanical/English name   Plant part/processing         Quantity
Vatsnabh (Shodhit)      Aconitum spp.            Aconites (processed)          25    g
Lauha Kanta             Iron ore                 Processed in amalaki juice    25    g
Abhrak Bhasam           Mica                     Processed                     25    g
Swarnmakshik Bhasam     Iron pyrites             Processed                     25    g
Makardhawaj             Red sulphide of          Processed                     25    g
                        mercury (gold)
Rajat Bhasam            Silver                   Processed                     25 g
Vang Bhasam             Tin                      Processed                     25 g
Katha                   Acacia catechu           Powder of wood extract        35 g
Sonth                   Ginger                   Powder                        35 g
Ghee Kawar              Aloe spp.                Juice                         As required


Method Heat iron ore in amalaki juice for a whole day. Pulverize all the other
herbs and minerals to a very ﬁne powder. Macerate iron ore and the ﬁne powder of
herbs and mineral in Aloe pulp until a thick paste is formed. Make pills of 250 mg
each and dry.

Dose 250 mg with ghee, sugar or honey for one year.

Use A geriatric tonic, for slow and long term treatment. Cures almost all diseases of
old age. In other cases, it imparts strength, vigour, intelligence and vitality. It cures
impotence due to chronic diseases.

Braham Rasayana

Ayurvedic name        Botanical/English name      Plant part/process      Quantity
Amalaki               Emblica ofﬁcinalis          Fruit, fresh            1,000 in number
                                                  Fruit juice             1,000 fruits
Prashnaparni          Desmodium gangeticum        Root                    As required
Punernava             Boerhaavia diffusa          Root
Jivanti               Leptadenia reticulata       Root
Nagbala               Sida spinosa                Root
Mandukparni           Centella asiatica           Herb
Shatawari             Asparagus racemosus         Root
Shankhpushpi          Convolvulus pluricaulis     Herb
Peepali               Piper longum                Fruiting spike
Vavading              Embelia ribes               Seed
Kawanch               Mucuna pruriens             Seed
Gaduchi               Tinospora cordifolia        Stem
Chandan, Lal          Pterocarpus santalinus      Wood
Agar                  Aquilaria agallocha         Wood
Mulathi               Glycyrrhiza glabra          Root
                                                                                     continued
314 Some Rasayana formulations

Ayurvedic name         Botanical/English name      Plant part/process         Quantity
Aaak phul              Calotropis spp              Flower
Neelkamal phul         Lotus, blue                 Flower
Kamal phul, safed      Lotus, white                Flower
Chameli phul           Jasmine                     Flower
Malti phul             Aganosma dichotoma          Flower
Nagbala Ras            Sida spinosa                Juice                      4 litres
Suvaran Bhasam         Gold                        Processed                  As required
Rajat Bhasam           Silver                      Processed
Tamar Bhasam           Copper                      Processed
Parval Bhasam          Coral, red                  Processed
Lauha Bhasam           Iron                        Processed


Method Blanch amalaki fruit with the steam generated from milk (use milk instead
of water). When soft, remove the nut from the pulp, dry and pulverize it. Mix with
amalaki powder, juice of 1,000 amalaki fruits prepared separately and dry. When the
whole mass dries, weigh it, add to it one-eighth of its weight of the pulverized herbs
mentioned above, taking each herb in equal quantity. Add to this powder of mixture
of herbs and amalaki, four litres of Sida spinosa juice and dry the whole mass again in
the shade. Pulverize this mixture once again, and add two parts of honey and one part
of ghee until a thick paste is formed. Pour the paste in a container, seal, and subject it
to mild heat in such a way that the heat is uniform all over. Let it remain undisturbed
for two weeks, and note the weight of the product obtained. Take equal quantities of
all inorganic compounds (Bhasamas) given in the formulations to form one-eighth of
the total weight of the amalaki preparation obtained above. Mix the two to form a
homogenous paste for the pills.

Use This Rasayana is mainly used for Kuti Parveshika (indoor Rasayana treatment) for
rejuvenation of the whole body under the guidance of a health provider, who monitors
the condition of the patient, determines the dose and duration.

Jawahar Mohra

Ayurvedic name          Botanical/English name              Part/processing              Quantity
Mukta Pishti            Pearl                               Paste                         25 g
Lal Pishti              Ruby                                Paste                         25 g
Pukhraj Pishti          White or yellow sapphire            Paste                         25 g
Panna Pishti            Emerald                             Paste                         25 g
Neelam Pishti           Blue sapphire                       Paste                         25 g
Parval Pishti           Coral, red                          Paste                        250 g
Agate                   Agate                               Paste                         25 g
Kasturi                 Musk                                Resin                          1.5 g
Ambergrease             Ambergris                           Resin                          1.5 g
Rajta vark              Silver                              Foil                          50 g
Suvarn vark             Gold                                Foil                          10 g
Zahar Mohra             Serpentine                          Paste                         10 g
Abe Resham              Silk cocoon                         Powder, ﬁne                  500 g
                                                     Some Rasayana formulations      315
Method Make a paste of all the items mentioned above, except musk, silk cocoon
and amber. Do not let the paste dry. To the wet paste, add silver and gold foil and
triturate the whole mixture, than add musk, amber and silk cocoon powder until it
becomes homogenous. Make pills of the size of a rice grain.

Dose Remove the stone from a date palm fruit, and in its place put two pills of
Jawahar Mohra, along with a pinch of saffron. Take this medicated date palm daily for
two weeks.

Use For high blood pressure, heart trouble, heart palpitations and irregular heart
beat.

Kamdugdha Ras

Ayurvedic name             Scientiﬁc/English name         Part/processing       Quantity
Mukta Pishti               Pearl                          Paste                 10   g
Parval Pishti              Coral red                      Paste                 10   g
Mukta Shukti Pishti        Mother of Pearl                Paste                 10   g
Cowrie Pishti              Cypraea moneta                 Paste                 10   g
Shankh Bhasam              Mollusc shells                 Processed             10   g
Garu lal                   Red ochre (Iron oxide)         Processed             10   g
Gaduchi satav              Tinospora spp.                 Starch                10   g


Method Take equal quantities of all the above ingredients and triturate to form a
uniform mixture.

Dose 250 mg with cumin, sugar, twice daily.

Uses It is said to have a cooling effect on the body, so it is used for inﬂammation,
digestion, urinary tract infection, hyperacidity, headache, paralysis, mental problems,
and haemorrhage.

Laxami Vilas Ras

Ayurvedic name             Botanical/English name    Plant part/processing   Quantity
Kuchla Shodhit             Nux vomica                Seed processed          75 g
Mirch kali                 Black pepper              Powder                  75 g
Tankan Shodhit             Borax (crude)             Dehydrated              75 g
Swaran Makshik Bhasam      Iron pyrite               Processed               50 g
Gandhak Shodhit            Sulphur                   Processed               25 g
Parad Shodhit              Mercury                   Processed               12.5 g
Bhringraja Ras             Eclipta alba              Plant juice             As required
Amalaki Ras                Emblica ofﬁcinalis        Fruit juice             As required
Shatawari Ras              Asparagus spp.            Root juice              As required
Adrak Ras                  Ginger (fresh)            Juice                   As required
316 Some Rasayana formulations
Method Triturate mercury and sulphur until a black mass is formed. Add ﬁne pow-
ders of all herbs and minerals and triturate them in this black mass. Make paste by
adding ginger juice to it. When dry, soak and dry again in the juices of Asparagus,
Emblica, Eclipta, one after the other, three times each. Make pills of 125 mg.

Dose One pill.

Uses In wasting disease, lack of energy, provides nutrition to convalescent patients.

Laxman Vilas Ras

Ayurvedic name          Botanical/English name        Plant part/processing      Quantity
Abhrak Bhasam           Mica                          Processed                  40   g
Parad Bhasam            Mercury                       Puriﬁed                    20   g
Gandhak Shodhit         Sulphur                       Puriﬁed                    20   g
Mushkafoor              Camphor                       Crystals                   10   g
Jaiphal                 Nutmeg                        Seed powder                10   g
Javitri                 Mace                          Aril powder                10   g
Vidhara Beej            Argyreia nervosa              Seed powder                10   g
Dhatura Beej            Datura spp                    Seed powder                10   g
Bhang Beej              Cannabis                      Seed powder                10   g
Vidarikand              Pueraria tubereosa            Root powder                10   g
Shatawari               Asparagus racemosus           Root powder                10   g
Nagbala                 Sida spinosa.                 Herb powder                10   g
Atibala                 Abutilon indicum              Seed powder                10   g
Gokshru                 Tribulus terrestris           Seed powder                10   g
Pan Ras                 Piper betle                   Juice of leaves            10   g


Method Mix all the powders and minerals, followed by juice and camphor and divide
into doses of 125 mg.

Dose 1–2 doses twice daily with milk, or macerate the powder honey and take with
a spoon.

Use It is a supreme Rasayana, acts on all organs of the body, and rectiﬁes all doshas,
diseases. It is a geriatric tonic and prevents premature grey hairs, wrinkles, failing
senses, and loss of immunity. It is a cardiotonic with beneﬁcial effects on all parts of
the heart and vascular system. It does not cause depression after stimulation as is the
case with many other preparations. In this case heart and pulse rates remain normal.
It helps sinking heart, cardiac palpitation, restlessness, and angina. It is effective in
inﬂuenza nervousness, breathlessness, dry cough, oedema of head and feet, indigestion,
diarrhoea and obesity.

Contraindications Fatty matters, sour, heavy food. Use under medical supervision;
sometimes it increases the pulse rate.
                                                        Some Rasayana formulations      317
Madanoday Modak

Ayurvedic name             Botanical/English name         Plant part/processing    Quantity
Javitri                    Mace                           Aril powder               15 g
Jaiphal                    Nutmeg                         Seed powder               15 g
Jatamansi                  Nardostachys grandiﬂora        Root powder               15 g
Lavang                     Clove                          Buds powder               15 g
Mushkafoor                 Camphor                        Crystals                  15 g
Keshar                     Saffron                        Stigma                    15 g
Iliachi, choti             Cardamom                       Fruit powder              15 g
Dalchini                   Cinnamon                       Bark powder               15 g
Sonth                      Ginger (dry)                   Rhizome powder            15 g
Mirch, Kali                Black pepper                   Fruit powder              15 g
Vang                       Tin                            Processed                 15 g
Abhrak                     Mica                           Processed                 15 g
Lauha                      Iron                           Processed                 22.5 g
Makardhawaj/Ras Sindur     Red sulphide of mercury        Processed                 22.5 g
Shatawari                  Asparagus racemosus            Root powder               22.5 g
Gokshru                    Tribulus terrestris            Fruit powder              22.5 g
Draksha                    Dry grapes                     Fruit                     22.5 g
Kakrasingi                 Pistacia lentiscus             Gall powder               22.5 g
Bala                       Sida spp.                      Seed powder               22.5 g
Kawanch                    Mucuna pruriens                Seed processed            22.5 g
Kushth                     Saussurea lappa                Root powder               22.5 g
Vidhara                    Argyreia speciosa              Seed powder               22.5 g
Bhang                      Cannabis sativus               Leaves, ﬂower tops       200 g
Shakar                     Sugar                                                   800 g


Method Make syrup with the sugar, add powder of all the herbs and minerals, and
form candy balls of 3–5 g each.

Use It increases libido enormously when taken with boiled milk containing sugar
and cardamom seed. It is an anabolic agent and, if used for three months, it gives
extensive sexual and physical vigour.

Makardhwaj Vati

Ayurvedic name    Botanical/English name                   Plant part/processing   Quantity
Makardhawaj       Red sulphide of mercury (with gold)      Processed               10   g
Mushkafoor        Camphor                                  Crystals                10   g
Jaiphal           Nutmeg                                   Powder                  10   g
Mirch Kali        Black Pepper                             Powder                  10   g
Kasturi           Musk                                     Resin                    3   g


Method Triturate all dry powders mentioned in the formulation, ﬁrst in camphor and
after that in musk. Moisten the whole mass with water and make pills of 250 mg each.

Dose One pill in the morning, one in the evening with milk, butter and sugar. Use
in winter months only.
318 Some Rasayana formulations
Use As a physical and mental tonic, provides strength and energy to the heart, brain,
nervous and urinogenital systems and thus cures impotence.

Manmath Ras

Ayurvedic name         Botanical/English name      Plant part/processing     Quantity
Parad Bhasam           Mercury                     Processed                 40   g
Gandhak Shodhit        Sulphur                     Processed                 40   g
Abhrak Bhasam          Mica                        Processed                 20   g
Mushkafur              Camphor                     Crystal powder            10   g
Vanga Bhasam           Tin                         Processed                 10   g
Lauha Bhasam           Iron                        Processed                 10   g
Tamar Bhasam           Copper                      Processed                 10   g
Vidhara                Argyreia nervosa            Root powder                3   g
Jeera Safed            Cumin                       Seed powder                3   g
Vidari kand            Pueraria tuberosa           Root powder                3   g
Shatwari               Asparagus racemosus         Root powder                3   g
Talamkhana             Hygrophila spinosa          Seed powder                3   g
Bala                   Sida spp.                   Seed powder                3   g
Kawanch                Mucuna pruriens             Seed processed             3   g
Ativisha               Aconitum heterophyllum      Root powder                3   g
Javitri                Mace                        Aril powder                3   g
Jaiphal                Nutmeg                      Seed powder                3   g
Lavang                 Clove                       Bud powder                 3   g
Bhang                  Cannabis sativus            Seed powder                3   g
Ajwain                 Trachyspermum ammi          Seed powder                3   g
Ral Safed              Pinus spp.                  Gum resin                  3   g


Method Triturate all the minerals in a pestle and mortar. Separately, in a grinder,
make a ﬁne powder of all the herbal ingredients. Mix the two, moisten with water to
form a thick paste and make pills of 250 mg each.

Dose Boil milk vigorously. When warm, take one pill with this milk in the morning
and one in the evening.

Use Manmath is another name for Kamdeva, the god of sex. Manmath Ras is used for
regularizing all types of sexual inadequacies in men; it cures many sexual diseases,
helps in senescence and keeps death away.
   It is customary to add opium in preparations used for delaying ejaculation, but
Manmath Ras is unique in that it does not contain opium but has the same effect as
opium-containing recipes.
   It is effective in diseases of women such as leucorrhoea, slackness of ovary and
irregular ovulation. It aids in conception and helps proper development of the foetus
and in retention of placenta.
                                                       Some Rasayana formulations         319
Mukta Panchamrit Rasayana

Ayurvedic name               Botanical/English name        Processing          Quantity
Mukta Bhasam                 Pearl                         Processed           40   g
Parval Bhasam                Coral                         Processed           20   g
Vang Bhasam                  Tin                           Processed           10   g
Shankh Bhasam                Molluscs                      Processed            5   g
Mukta Shukti Bhasam          Mother of Pearl               Processed            5   g
Shatawari Ras                Asparagus racemosus           Juice               As   required
Vidari kand Ras              Pueraria tuberosa             Juice               As   required
Ghee kanwar Ras              Aloe spp.                     Juice               As   required
Ganna Ras                    Sugar cane                    Juice               As   required


Method Pulverize all animal and mineral ingredients to a ﬁne powder. Triturate these
pulverized materials in pestle and mortar, ﬁrst with the juice of Asparagus racemousus,
then let the juice dry and add juice of Pueraria tuberosa. When this dries add aloe pulp,
dry again then add sugarcane juice. Repeat the process ﬁve times, and when moist
enough make pills of 125 mg each.

Dose One pill twice daily.

Use Same as for pearl paste and ash. It is said to have a cooling effect on the body, so
is used as a cerebral tonic, cardiotonic, in nervous diseases and sexual inadequacies.

Nari Kalyan Pak

Ayurvedic name            Botanical/English name       Plant part/processing        Quantity
Supari boiled in water    Areca catechu                Nuts boiled in water         100 g
Katha                     Acacia catechu               Extract of catechu
Musali Safed              Chlorophytum arundinaceum    Root                         100   g
Aswagandha                Withania somnifera           Root                         100   g
Sonth                     Ginger (dry)                 Root                          10   g
Peepali                   Piper longum                 Fruiting spike                10   g
Peeplamul                 Piper longum                 Root                          10   g
Jeera Safed               Cumin                        Seed                          10   g
Lawang                    Clove                        Flower buds                   10   g
Dalchini                  Cinnamon                     Bark.                         10   g
Tejpat                    Cinnamomum spp.              Leaves                        10   g
Nagkesar                  Mesua ferrea                 Flower                        10   g
Kamarkas                  Butea frondosa               Gum                           10   g
Chava                     Piper chaba                  Fruit                         10   g
Chitrak                   Plumbago zeylanica           Root                          10   g
Lajwanti                  Mimosa pudica                Seed                          10   g
Talamkhana                Astercantha longifolia       Seed                          10   g
Nirgundi                  Vitex negundo                Seed                          10   g
Luha Bhasam               Iron                         Processed                     10   g
Parval Bhasam             Coral, red                   Processed                     10   g
Abhrak Bhasam             Mica                         Processed                     10   g
Vanga Bhasam              Tin                          Processed                     10   g
Ghee                      Butter oil                                                300   g
Dudh                      Milk                                                        2   l
320 Some Rasayana formulations
Method Pulverize 100 g each of areca nut after boiling in decoction of catechu until
soft and dry, along with Chlorophytum arundinaceum and Withania somnifera followed
later by all other remaining herbs. Mix all the inorganic processed materials and make
a separate ﬁne powder.
   Boil whole milk until it becomes condensed and forms a thick slurry. To this milk,
add ﬁne powders of the ﬁrst three items, heat further until the whole mass becomes
solidiﬁed, and fry in ghee (300 g). Add thick syrup of sugar to taste and the ﬁne
powder of the remaining herbs and processed minerals. Mix thoroughly and make
candy balls of 25–50 g each.

Dose As per digestive power, chew one candy with milk.

Use It makes women’s bodies healthy, keeps them in proper shape, and protects from
all gynaecological problems.

Navjeevan Ras

Ayurvedic name        Botanical/English name         Plant part/processing      Quantity
Kuchla Shodhit        Nux vomica                     Seed processed             25   g
Swarn Makshik         Iron pyrites                   Processed                  25   g
Ras Sindur            Red sulphide of mercury        Processed                  25   g
Sonth                 Ginger (dry)                   Powder                     50   g
Peepali               Long pepper                    Powder                     50   g
Mirch Kali            Black pepper                   Powder                     50   g
Adrak                 Ginger (fresh)                 Juice                      As   required


Method Macerate all the ingredients in ginger juice, when wet enough and homog-
enous, make pills of 125 g each.

Dose 125 mg.

Use It imparts a new lease of life to the body by increasing strength, and memory. It
activates the nervous system and thus helps diseases caused by inactivation of this system.

Navratna Ras

Ayurvedic name         Botanical/English name           Plant part/processing        Quantity
Heera Bhasam           Diamond                          Processed                     14   g
Pukhraj Bhasam         Topaz                            Processed                     16   g
Neelam Bhasam          Aquamarine/sapphire              Processed                     20   g
Lal Bhasam             Ruby                             Processed                     20   g
Vidurya Bhasam         Cat’s eye                        Processed                     26   g
Gomed Bhasam           Hesonite                         Processed                     26   g
Mukta Bhasam           Pearl                            Processed                     30   g
Parval Bhasam          Coral                            Processed                     30   g
Panna Bhasam           Tourmaline/Emerald               Processed                     16   g
Vikrant Bhasam         Silica                           Processed                     30   g
Ras Sindur             Black sulphide of mercury        Powder                       250   g
Peepali                Long pepper                      Powder                       250   g
                                                          Some Rasayana formulations   321
Method Make pills containing 50 mg of above ingredients by adding binders to the
mixture.

Dose 1 pill twice a day.

Use For general debility, convalescence and wasting disease.

Navratnakalpa Amrit
Ayurvedic name         Botanical/English name         Plant part/processing    Quantity
Pukhraj Pishti         Topaz                          Paste                    10   g
Neelam Pishti          Aquamarine                     Paste                    10   g
Rajat Bhasam           Silver                         Processed                20   g
Rajvart Pishti         Turquoise                      Paste                    20   g
Parval Pishti          Coral                          Paste                    20   g
Suvarn Bhasam          Gold                           Processed                 6   g
Yashad Bhasam          Zinc                           Processed                 6   g
Abhrak Bhasam          Mica                           Processed                 6   g
Guggal                 Commiphora wightii             Oleo gum resin           12   g
Shilajit               Bituminous compound            Paste                    12   g
Gaduchi                Tinospora spp.                 Starch                   12   g
Ghee                   Clariﬁed butter oil            Pure fat                 As   required


Method Triturate all inorganic compounds and pastes. Add gum guggal, ghee and
Tinospora starch to it, and triturate the whole mixture again until homogenous. Dis-
solve Shilajit in a small amount of water and mix it in the above mixture. When
homogenous make pills of 250 mg each.

Dose 2 pills twice daily with milk for one year.

Use As a geriatric tonic. It strengthens all parts of the human body, stabilizes vata,
pitta and kapha. It is a boon for mental workers as it has beneﬁcial effects on the brain
and heart. It is an antidote to both internal and external toxins, particularly when
ama is produced in the body due to the wrong type of food, irregular diet, lack of
regularity in life style. It mitigates ama and brings tridosha into equilibrium.

Panchamrit Ras
Ayurvedic name     Botanical/English name           Plant part/processing      Quantity
Parad Bhasam       Mercury                          Processed                  10   g
Lauh Bhasam        Iron                             Processed                  10   g
Abhrak Bhasam      Mica                             Processed                  10   g
Tamar Bhasam       Copper                           Processed                  10   g
Shilajit Shodhit   Bituminous compound              Puriﬁed                    10   g
Guggal Shodhit     Commiphora wightii               Oleo gum resin, puriﬁed    As   required
Triphala Kadha     Emblica ofﬁcinalis, Terminalia   Decoction of fruits        As   required
                   bellirica, T. chebula mixture
Gaduchi Kadha      Tinospora spp.                   Decoction of stem          As required
322 Some Rasayana formulations
Method Macerate Guggal gum in the decoction of Tinospora spp. and Triphala, and
mix in the ﬁne powder of all the remaining items. Knead all these together until
homogenous, and make pills of 60 mg each.

Dose 1–2 pills with goat’s milk, honey, ghee or water.

Use In wasting diseases, polyurea, weakness, tuberculosis, and as an antimicrobial
and antipyretic agent. It helps in all the three doshas of the body.

Paraadi Ras

Ayurvedic name           Botanical/English name    Plant part/process       Quantity
Parad Bhasam             Mercury                   Processed                10   g
Gandhak Shodhit          Sulphur                   Puriﬁed                  10   g
Vang Bhasam (Shatputi)   Tin                       Processed (100 times)    10   g
Rasuant                  Berberis spp.             Water extract (dry)      30   g
Lodhra                   Symplocos racemosa        Bark powder              60   g
Vasaka                   Adhatoda vasica           Juice of herb            As   required


Method Triturate mercury with sulphur and add ﬁne powders of the remaining items.
Add the required quantity of the juice of Adhatoda, until a thick paste is formed.
Homogenize the whole mixture further for 6 hours and make pills of 375 mg
each.

Dose 1–2 pills twice daily with honey, or with rice gruel or water. For additional
beneﬁt take it with 2 g Bergenia ligulata powder.

Use It is a Rasayana for women, and the pill gives relief if vaginal ﬂow increases due
to excessive intercourse, wrong diet, wrong way of living, short temper, stress, etc.
During this medication, use of intoxicants, narcotics, luxurious life, junk spicy food
leading to laziness, backache, pains, stress, etc. should be avoided.

Ramchuramani Ras

Ayurvedic name            Botanical/English name     Part used/processing   Quantity
Mukta Pishti              Pearl                      Paste                  20   g
Swarn Makshik Bhasam      Iron pyrite                Processed              20   g
Suvarn Bhasam             Gold                       Processed              20   g
Bhimseni Kapoor           Borneol                    Powder                 20   g
Jaiphal                   Nutmeg                     Fruit powder           20   g
Vanga Bhasam              Tin                        Processed              20   g
Rajat Bhasam              Silver                     Processed              20   g
Dalchini                  Cinnamon                   Bark powder            10   g
Tejpat                    Cinnamomum spp.            Leaf powder            10   g
Ilaichi Choti             Cardamom                   Fruit powder           10   g
Nag Kesar                 Mesua ferrea               Bud powder             10   g
Shatawari Ras             Asparagus racemosus        Root juice             As   required
                                                          Some Rasayana formulations     323
Method Prepare a ﬁne powder of all items and keep them in the juice of Asparagus for
seven days. Make pills of 125 g each.

Dose 1–2 pills twice daily with milk.

Use A cooling, nutritive sex stimulant and aphrodisiac. It is considered suitable for
those persons who consume items which are hot in nature, such as hot and spicy food,
intoxicants, alcohol, meat preparations, etc. It does not have any narcotic or side
effects and can be used throughout the year.

Rasayana for infants
Ayurvedic name      Botanical/Scientiﬁc name   Plant part/process                   Quantity
Yashad Bhasam       Zinc                       Processed                             5   g
Parval Pishti       Coral, red                 Paste with water                     10   g
Heran Sing Bhasam   Deer/stag horn             Ash                                   5   g
Tankan Bhasam       Borax (dehydrated)         Powder                                5   g
Mirch Safed         White pepper               Powder, outer black coat removed     10   g
Shathi              Hedychium spicatum         Rhizome powder                       20   g
Kesar               Saffron                    Style and stigma                      5   g

Method Triturate ﬁne powders of above, moisten with water, and make pills of
65 mg each.
Dose and Use Crush a pill in one teaspoon of mother’s milk or cow’s milk, and
administer to child followed by milk or honey with Embelia ribes powder. It is an
anabolic agent, acts on all the systems of the body, particularly when there are symp-
toms of fever, cold cough, vomiting, loose motions, indigestion and worm infestation.

Rattivalabh Pak
Ayurvedic name      Botanical/Scientiﬁc name        Plant part/process            Quantity
Gond Kikar          Gum acacia                      Powder                        500 g
Sonth               Ginger (dry)                    Powder                        100 g
Peepali             Piper longum                    Fruiting spike powder         100 g
Piplamul            Piper longum                    Root powder                    25 g
Lawang              Clove                           Powder                         25 g
Jaiphal             Nutmeg                          Powder                         25 g
Javitri             Mace                            Powder                         25 g
Kamarkas            Bombax malabarium               Gum powder                     25 g
Shilajit            Bituminous compound             Paste                          10 g
Mirch Kali          Black pepper                    Powder                         10 g
Dalchini            Cinnamon                        Powder                         10 g
Tejpat              Cinnamomum spp.                 Leaf powder                    10 g
Nagkeshar           Mesua ferrea                    Flower powder                  10 g
Ilaichi             Cardamom                        Fruit powder                   10 g
Parval Bhasam       Coral, red                      Processed (calcined)           10 g
Lauh Bhasam         Iron                            Processed                      10 g
Abhrak Bhasam       Mica                            Processed                      10 g
Keshar              Saffron                         Stigma and style                 5g
Ghee                Clariﬁed Butter                                               250 g
Mishri              Sugar candy                                                      2 kg
Sukha Mewa          Dried fruits                                                  as required
324 Some Rasayana formulations
Method Fry gums in clariﬁed butter. Separately powder ginger, long pepper fruiting
spikes and roots. In another batch make a ﬁne powder of saffron, spices, processed
minerals, mix them and pass them through a ﬁne cloth or a sieve. Chop almond,
pistachio, dry grapes and coconut.
   Make sugar syrup, and add to it all the powders of herbs and minerals except saffron
and spices until the sugar syrup is of thick consistency. When the syrup starts to
solidify and is still warm, add saffron and spices. Smear a ﬂat plate with clariﬁed
butter, and spread the above semi solid mixture on it. Put chopped dry fruits as a top
layer and make pieces of 25 g each.

Dose 25–50 g as per the digestive power of the patient. Chew it in the morning with
an empty stomach, along with warm milk.

Use It acts on the body in various ways. It provides the body with the energy required
for delaying ejaculation during sex. It imparts beauty and health to women, gives enough
strength for sex and relief in leucorrhoea. It is of immense use after giving birth.

Shukar Amritika Vati

Ayurvedic name        Botanical/English name    Plant part/processing           Quantity
Parad Bhasam          Mercury                   Processed                       40   g
Gandhak Bhasam        Sulphur                   Processed                       40   g
Abhrak Bhasam         Mica                      Processed                       40   g
Lauh Bhasam           Iron                      Processed                       40   g
Iliachi               Cardamom                  Fruit powder                    40   g
Gokshru               Tribulus terrestris       Fruit decoction                 20   g
Vibhitaki             Terminalia bellirica      Fruit powder                    20   g
Hariatki              T. chebula                Fruit powder                    20   g
Amalaki               Emblica ofﬁcinalis        Fruit powder                    20   g
Tejpat                Cinnamomum spp.           Leaf powder                     20   g
Rasaunt               Berberis spp.             Water extract, dry              20   g
Chava                 Piper chaba               Fruit powder                    20   g
Talispatra            Abies spp.                Leaf powder                     20   g
Tankan Bhasam         Borax, crude              Dehydrated powder               20   g
Anar                  Punica granatum           Sweet fruit seed                20   g
Guggal (Shodhit)      Commiphora wightii        Oleo gum resin (Processed)      10   g


Method Triturate sulphur and mercury compounds until homogenous. Make a decoc-
tion of gokshru, and add mercury sulphur compound, and a ﬁne powder of the remain-
ing items to this decoction. Add additional decoction to such an extent that a paste
wet enough for making pills is formed. Triturate this paste further for 12 hours and
make pills of 250 mg each.

Dose 1–2 pills with milk, water or pomegranate juice as per the age and severity of
the illness of the patients.

Use It is used particularly for diseases of the nervous and urinogenital systems, until
total recovery is achieved. In helps in the formation of blood in the body, makes the
                                                          Some Rasayana formulations   325
body muscular, thickens and puriﬁes spermatic ﬂuid, and acts as a mental stimulant.
It helps impotence due to weakness of the nervous system. In involuntary nocturnal
emission and/or premature ejaculation, 1 pill twice daily is used.

Precaution The dose of the medication should not be increased. The patient should
lead a simple, regulated, disciplined life without amorous activity of any type.

Smritisagar Ras

Ayurvedic name     Botanical/English name    Plant part/processing             Quantity
Parad Bhasam       Mercury                  Processed                          10 g
Gandhak Shodhit    Sulphur                  Processed                          10 g
Hartal             Arsenic compound         Prepared from 49 parts of          10 g
                                            arsenic and 24 parts of sulphur
Manshil            Arsenic compound         Prepared from 49 parts of          10 g
                                            arsenic and 16 parts of sulphur
Tamar Bhasam       Copper                   Processed                          10   g
Malkangani Tail    Celastrus paniculatus    Oil                                As   required
Mandukparni        Centela asiatica         Herb juice or decoction            As   required
Vach               Acorus calamus           Rhizome juice or decoction         As   required


Method Take equal quantities of all the minerals, triturate them in a pestle mortar
ﬁrst with Celastrus paniculatus oil, enough to moisten the materials, and then soak and
dry the mixture 21 times in the decoction or juice of Calamus and Centella. Make pills
of 60 mg.

Dose 60–120 mg with butter and ghee.

Use This mixture is mainly prescribed for loss of memory, but is used for any type of
weakness in the nervous system (sedative, tranquilizer, antidepressant) and also for
paralysis, hysteria, sudden spasm, sudden loss of memory, pain nausea, vomiting, and
threatened abortion. It was tried by Tripathi and Singh (1995) in residual schizophre-
nia with good results.

Note If during the administration of this compound, poisoning due to arsenic is
evident, give juice of Benincasa hispida, cumin seed and sugar for three days.

Suvaran Malini Vasant

Ayurvedic name             Botanical/English name     Plant part/processing    Quantity
Suvaran Vark or Bhasam     Gold                       Foil or processed        10 g
Mukta Pishti or Bhasam     Pearl                      Paste or processed       20 g
Hingul                     Arsenic compound           Processed                30 g
Mirch Safed                White pepper               Pepper with seed coat
                                                      removed, powder          40   g
Yashad Bhasam              Zinc                       Processed                80   g
Makhan                     Butter                                              20   g
Nimbu ka ras               Lemon juice                                         As   required
326 Some Rasayana formulations
Method Triturate gold and hingul in a pestle and mortar until mixed uniformly. If
gold foils are to be used, do not add all at once but use a single gold foil at a time,
triturate until mixed, add more, and so on. To this mixture add white pepper, pearl,
zinc compound and butter; triturate further for three hours. Add the required quantity
of ﬁltered fresh lemon juice to the mixture, triturate until the butter becomes fully
emulsiﬁed and no separate fatty matter is evident. Continue this treatment of the
mixture with fresh lemon juice for 8–10 days until the product is no longer greasy.
Make pills of 125 mg each.

Dose 1–2 pills twice daily with 250 mg of long pepper, and honey, for 40 days. In
children the dose can be halved.

Use It helps in all types of weakness and diseases in the body, particularly tuberculo-
sis, AIDS, in low constant fever, liver and spleen enlargement. For weak eyesight, red
eyes, and eye infection, use one pill twice daily with butter and sugar. In mental
weakness, and in chronic fevers, use one pill twice daily with cold milk. In respiratory
problems one pill twice daily with a teaspoon of honey and 250 mg of long pepper
powder is used. For stimulating the neuromuscular system, one pill with cumin and
sugar, or Emblica preserve, or with pomegranate juice sweetened with milk is given.
For nocturnal emission, the dose is one pill twice daily, with half a spoon of honey and
one spoon of butter, while other sexual inadequacies are treated with one pill twice daily
with 1–2 spoons of honey in cold milk for 40 days. This preparation gives a perman-
ent cure and can be used in any weather, by any person of any age. It is a general tonic
for women with various gynaecological problems such as leucorrhoea, dysmenorrhoea,
weakness due to pregnancy, etc. In leucorrhoea one pill twice daily with rice gruel for
forty days is required. For proper nutrition of the foetus of expectant mothers, one pill
twice daily with honey in milk, or butter and sugar should be taken.

Precautions Sour things such as tamarind, unripe mango, and hot food such as spices,
red pepper, non-vegetarian and fried items are prohibited.

Suvarna Vasant Malti

Ayurvedic name            English name                       Processing           Quantity
Suvarn vark               Gold                               Foil                 10   g
Mukta pishti              Pearl                              Paste                10   g
Ras Sindur                Red sulphide of mercury            Processed            10   g
Yashad Bhasam             Zinc                               Processed            10   g
Tamar Bhasam              Copper                             Processed            10   g
Mirch kali                Black pepper                       Powder               10   g


Method Make a ﬁne powder of the minerals, mix black pepper powder, and triturate
with gold foils and pearl paste until a homogenous mixture is formed. Make pills of
32 g each.

Use   1–2 pills for impotence due to chronic fevers.
                                                      Some Rasayana formulations     327
Swapanmehntak

Ayurvedic name         Botanical/English name        Plant part/processing        Quantity
Vang Bhasam            Tin                           Processed                    25 g
Arishtak majja         Sapindus mukrosii             Kernel powder                50 g
Mishri                 Sugar candy                   Bold crystals                50 g


Method    Triturate the three ingredients, moisten and make pills of 350 mg each.

Dose 3–6 pills with water

Use In diabetes, loss of spermatic ﬂuid, spermatorrhoea, for increasing retention
power of seminal discharge, and in wasting diseases. In involuntary nocturnal emission
take two pills three times a day with water, do not eat in the evening.

Vasant Kusmakar Ras

Ayurvedic name      Botanical/English name        Plant part/processing      Quantity
Parval Pishti       Coral                         Paste                      40   g
Mukta Pishti        Pearl                         Paste                      40   g
Ras Sindur          Red sulphide of mercury       Processed                  40   g
Abhrak Bhasam       Mica                          Processed                  40   g
Suvarn Bhasam       Gold                          Processed                  10   g
Rajat Bhasam        Silver                        Processed                  10   g
Lauha Bhasam        Iron                          Processed                  30   g
Vang Vark           Tin foils                     Processed                  30   g
Amber               Ambergris                     Aromatic resin             30   g
Kasturi             Musk                          Aromatic resin             20   g
Keshar              Saffron                       Stigma and style           20   g
Vasaka Ras          Adhatoda vasica               Decoction, ﬂower top       As   required
Haldi Kwath         Turmeric                      Decoction                  As   required
Gana Ras            Sugar cane                    Juice                      As   required
Shatawari Ras       Asparagus spp.                Juice of root              As   required
Kadli Ras           Banana (wild)                 Juice of stem              As   required
Chandan Kwath       Sandal                        Decoction of wood          As   required
Kamal Kwath         Lotus                         Decoction of ﬂower         As   required


Method Triturate all the inorganic materials in powder form, with juice/decoction of
each of the herb, as per formulation one by one (Adhatoda, followed by decoction of
turmeric sugar cane juice, lotus ﬂower juice, Asparagus juice, banana stem juice, and
ﬁnally decoction of sandalwood) for 3–6 hours in sufﬁcient quantity for free move-
ment of the mass in a pestle and mortar. Triturate further for 3 hours with musk and
ambergris, and make pills of 125 mg each.

Dose 1/2 to 1 pill twice daily with milk fat or butter and sugar.

Use It is a geriatric and sexual tonic used for rejuvenation. It gives energy to all the
body systems, but is particularly useful for the brain, heart, lungs, alimentary canal,
328 Some Rasayana formulations
and the sexual organs. In diabetes, one pill twice daily is said to reduce sugar both
from urine and blood. As a mental tonic, make a decoction of half a teaspoon each of
cinnamon, cinnamon leaves and cardamom, and boil them in 200 ml water. Take one
pill daily with this decoction. In haemorrhage or bleeding from any part of the body,
take half a pill with sugar/honey. For male sexual inadequacy take one pill before sleep
or early in the morning. In acute cases, one pill twice daily with milk may be taken.
For gynaecological problems make a paste of coral, take 5 g of this paste, mix it in
2 g Vasant Kusmakar Ras and make 24 doses from this mixture. Take one dose twice
daily with milk.

Visha Rasayana

Ayurvedic name         Botanical/English name          Plant part/processing        Quantity
Vatsnabh (shodhit)     Aconite                         Mitigated                    12   g
Ras Sindur             Red sulphide of mercury         Processed                    25   g
Parad Bhasam           Mercury                         Processed                    12   g
Rajat Bhasam           Silver                          Processed                    12   g
Tamar Bhasam           Copper in mercury               Compound                     50   g
                       and sulphur                     Preparation
Sonth                  Ginger (dry)                    Powder                       50   g
Peepali                Long pepper                     Powder                       50   g
Mirch Kali             Black pepper                    Powder                       50   g
Dalchini               Cinnamon                        Powder                       50   g
Tejpat                 Cinnamomum spp.                 Powder leaves                50   g
Nag Kesar              Mesua ferrea                    Powder ﬂower                 50   g
Chitrak                Plumbago zeylanica              Powder root                  50   g


Method    Macerate all the items and make pills of 250 mg each by adding a binder.

Dose 1–2 pills.

Use This Rasayana gives strength and imparts immunity. It increases internal ﬁre of
the body, which activates liver, spleen and thus digestion. It is useful for the amorous
person with multiple partners. For longevity, it should be used for two months.

Vrahida Vangashwar Rasa

Ayurvedic name         Botanical/English name      Plant part/processing       Quantity
Vang Bhasam            Tin                         Processed                   12   g
Parad Bhasam           Mercury                     Processed                   12   g
Abhrak Bhasam          Mica                        Processed                   12   g
Gandhak Shodhit        Sulphur                     Puriﬁed                     12   g
Suvarna Bhasam         Gold                        Processed                    3   g
Rajat Bhasam           Silver                      Processed                   12   g
Mukta Pishti           Pearl                       Paste with water             3   g
Mushkafoor             Camphor                     Crystals                    12   g
Bhringraja             Eclipta alba                Juice                       As   required
                                                     Some Rasayana formulations    329
Method Mix mercury and sulphur, and other items in the juice of Eclipta alba, tritu-
rate and make pills of 125 mg each.

Dose 1–2 pills twice daily with goat’s milk or yogurt.

Use It helps in all types of chronic diabetes, and urinogenital problems. It compen-
sates loss in the body from to excessive amorous activities.


PRODUCTS WITH TRADE NAMES

The trade name of the product along with the name of manufacturer in brackets, brief
indications and detail about the ingredient is given in each case. In the labels/bro-
chures of these products, some manufacturers gave Ayurvedic names, while others
used botanical names, still other mentioned both names. Plant part is usually not
mentioned. In many cases it was not clear whether the herb was used or a particular
type of extract was incorporated in the formulations. In these cases whatever informa-
tion was available has been given.

1-Top (Pentovax)

For rejuvenation and virility

Ayurvedic name         Botanical/English name         Part used               Quantity
Keshar                 Crocus sativus                 Style                   15   mg
Akarkara               Anacyclus pyrethrum            Root                    15   mg
Shankhpushpi           Canscora decussata             Herb                    15   mg
Jatamansi              Nardostachys jatamansi         Root                    15   mg
Malkangani             Celastrus paniculatus          Seed                    15   mg
Jaiphal                Nutmeg                         Seed                    20   mg
Peepali                Long pepper                    Fruiting spike          20   mg
Sonth                  Ginger                         Root                    20   mg
Dalchini               Cinnamon                       Bark                    20   mg
Pan                    Piper betle                    Leaves                  20   mg
Talamkhana             Hygrophila spinosa             Seed                    40   mg
Lata kasturi           Hibiscus abelomoschus          Seed                    40   mg
Ashwgandha             Withania somnifera             Root                    40   mg
Satavar                Asparagus racemosus            Root                    40   mg
Mundi                  Spharenthus indicus            Flowers                 40   mg
Kuth                   Saussurea lappa                Root                    40   mg
Jaiphal                Nutmeg                         Seed                    40   mg
Salam mishri           Orchis mascula                 Root                    40   mg
Khas                   Vetiveria zizanoides           Root                    40   mg
Lawang                 Clove                          Buds                    80   mg
330 Some Rasayana formulations
Ashree Forte (Aimil pharmacy)

Increases sexual activity, libido

Ayurvedic name               Botanical/English name                  Part used      Quantity
Makardhawaj                  Red sulphide of mercury with gold       –               20   mg
Kesar                        Saffron                                 Style           20   mg
Jaiphal                      Nutmeg                                  Seed            20   mg
Javitri                      Mace                                    Aril            20   mg
Shilajit                     Bituminous compound                     –               20   mg
Swarn Vang                   Processed tin                           –               10   mg
Gaduchi satva                Tinospora cordifolia                    Starch          20   mg
Trivang Bhasam               Processed lead, tin and zinc            –               10   mg
Gokshuru ghansatva           Tribulus terrestris                     Seed Extract    20   mg
Kaunch (processed)           Mucuna pruriens                         Seed           150   mg
Ashwgandha                   Withania somnifera                      Root            30   mg
Shatawar                     Asparagus racemosus                     Root            30   mg
Safed Musli                  Chlorophytum arundinaceum               Root            20   mg
Bhilwa                       Semecarpus anacardium                   Seed            30   mg
Til                          Sesame seed                             Extract         20   mg
Varahi kand                  Dioscorea bulbifera                     Root            20   mg
Tejpatar                     Cinnamomum iners                        Leaf            15   mg
Dalchini                     Cinnamon                                Bark            15   mg
Dhtura beej (processed)      Datura spp.                             Seed            10   mg
Kuchla (processed)           Nux vomica                              Seed            10   mg
Akarkara                     Anacyclus pyrethrum                     Root            10   mg


Brento (Zandu)

A general nerve tonic

Ayurvedic name            Botanical/English name                 Part used          Quantity
Shankhpushpi              Convolvulus microphyllus               Whole herb         100   mg
Mandukparni               Centella asiatica                      Whole herb         100   mg
Ashwgandha                Withania somnifera                     Root               100   mg
Mulathi                   Glycyrrhiza glabra                     Root               100   mg
Kuth                      Saussurea lappa                        Root                50   mg
Vacha                     Acorus calamus                         Root                25   mg
Serpgandha                Rauvolﬁa serpentina                    Root                25   mg
Jatiphala                 Myristica fragrans                     Fruit                5   mg
Chanderody Ras            A preparation of red sulphide          –                    5   mg
                          of mercury
                                                     Some Rasayana formulations   331
Fortege (Alarsin)

Aphrodisiac

Ayurvedic name         Botanical/English name           Part used           Quantity
Kamboji                Adenanthera pavonina             Seed                60 mg
Kawanch                Mucuna pruriens                  Seed                30 mg
Kuchula                Nux vomica (processed)           Seed                30 mg
Samundra sosh          Salvia plebia                    Seed                15 mg
Vardhara               Argyreia speciosa                Seed                15 mg
Vardhara               Argyreia speciosa                Root                15 mg
Asar                   Calotropis gigantea              Root bark           15 mg
Lavang                 Clove                            Bud                  7.5 mg
Piper                  Long pepper                      Fruit                7.5 mg
Vacha                  Calamus                          Root                 7.5 mg
Marich                 Black pepper                     Fruit                7.5 mg
Sunthi                 Ginger                           Root                 7.5 mg
Chini Kabab            Piper cubeba                     Fruit                7.5 mg
Akarkara               Anacyclus pyrethrum              Root                 7.5 mg
Sukhad                 Santalum album                   Wood                 7.5 mg
Jaifal                 Nutmeg                           Fruit                4.5 mg
Javitri                Mace                             Fruit                3.00 mg
Jeevanti               Leptadenia reticulata            Root                56.5 mg


Imminex (Hind Chemicals)

Immunomodulater

Ayurvedic name        Botanical name                  Plant part/process     Quantity
Kutaj                 Holarrhena antidysentrica       Bark                   50 mg
Kutaki                Picrorhiza kurroa               Rhizome                50 mg
Chirayta              Swertia chirata                 Herb                   25 mg


Jaryan (Yogi Pharmacy)

For sexual disorders and disability

Ayurvedic name          Botanical/English name              Part used        Quantity
Salam Mishri            Orchis mascula                      Root             33   mg
Safed musli             Asparagus adscendens                Root             33   mg
Kikar gond              Gum arabica                         Gum              33   mg
Shital chini            Piper cubeba                        Fruit            33   mg
Chobchini               Smilax glabra                       Root             33   mg
Vang Bhasam             Tin processed                       Root             33   mg
Jawahar Bhasam          Precious stones, processed          Root             33   mg
Luban                   Styrax benzoin                      Gum              33   mg
Gond Katira             Cochlospermum religiosum            Gum              66   mg
332 Some Rasayana formulations
Mast (Herba Indica)

For powerful, consistent, and focused performance

Ayurvedic name        Botanical name            Part used                Quantity
Kwanch                Mucuna pruriens           Seed processed in milk   250 mg
Gokshru               Tribulus terrestris       Seed water extract       150 mg


Mentat (Himalaya Drug)

Activates the mind

Ayurvedic name         Botanical/English name           Part used        Quantity
Brahmi                 Bacopa monnieri                  Herb Extract     136   mg
Mandukparni            Centella asiatica                Herb Extract      70   mg
Ashwgandha             Withania somnifera               Root Extract      52   mg
Shankhpushpi           Evolvulus alsinoides             Herb Extract      52   mg
Jatamansi              Nardostachys jatamansi           Root Extract      52   mg
Tagar                  Valeriana wallichii              Root Extract      50   mg
Babading               Embelia ribes                    Seed Extract      50   mg
Badam                  Almond                           Seed              50   mg
Haritaki               Terminalia chebula               Fruit Extract     36   mg
Amalaki                Emblica ofﬁcinalis               Fruit Extract     36   mg
Gaduchi                Tinospora cordifolia             Herb Extract      36   mg
Malakangni             Celastrus paniculatus            Seed Extract      32   mg
Shoyanaka              Oroxylum indicum                 Bark Extract      32   mg
Brahmi                 Bacopa monnieri                  Herb Powder       80   mg
Kawanch                Mucuna pruriens                  Seed Powder       18   mg
Ela                    Elettaria cardamomum             Seed Powder       18   mg
Arjun                  Terminalia arjuna                Bark Powder       18   mg
Saunf                  Fennel                           Seed Powder       18   mg
Salab mishri           Orchis mascula                   Root Powder       18   mg
Sunth                  Ginger                           Root Powder       14   mg
Vibhitaki              Terminalia bellirica             Fruit Powder      14   mg
Jaiphal                Nutmeg                           Fruit Powder      14   mg
Laung                  Clove                            Bud Powder        10   mg
Mukta pishti           Pearl                            Paste              3   mg
                                                                Some Rasayana formulations      333
Mucuna Forte (Deesons)

Aphrodisiac

Ayurvedic name         Botanical/English name                        Part used             Quantity
Ashwgandha             Withania somnifera                            Root                  80   mg
Vidhara                Argyreia nervosa                              Root                   5   mg
Kawanch                Mucuna pruriens                               Seed (processed)      30   mg
Akarkara               Anacyclus pyrethrum                           Root                  20   mg
Bala beej              Sida cordifolia                               Seed                  25   mg
Kuchla shodhit         Strychnos nux vomica                          Seed (processed)      10   mg
Salab panja            Eulophia campestris                           Root                  10   mg
Makardhawaj            Red sulphide of mercury with gold             –                     10   mg
Jaiphal                Myristica fragrans                            Fruit                 10   mg
Shilajit               Bituminous material                           Paste                 20   mg
Jund Bedaster          Castoreum                                     Oleo-resin            20   mg
Keshar                 Saffron                                       Style and stigma       4   mg
Processed in the decoction of Piper betle, onion, Withania and Asparagus.
Precaution: Do not use in cardiac diseases, hypertension and bleeding piles.


Power Pills (Gambers Lab.)

For instant sexual vigour

Ayurvedic name              Botanical/English name                             Part used   Quantity
Khurasani Ajwain            Hyoscyamus niger                                   Seed        45   mg
Makardhawaj                 Red sulphide of mercury with gold                  –           22   mg
Akrakara                    Anacyclus pyrethrum                                Root        15   mg
Jaiphal                     Nutmeg                                             Fruit       15   mg
Javitri                     Mace                                               Aril         7   mg
Lawang                      Clove                                              Buds         7   mg
Ashwgandha                  Withania somnifera                                 Root         7   mg
Kesar                       Saffron                                            Styles       7   mg
Amber                       Ambergris                                          Resin        7   mg


Ravin (Malabar Chemicals)

For retention power in sexual happiness

Ayurvedic name               Botanical/English name              Part used                 Quantity
Talamkhana                   Hygrophila spinosa                  Seed                      25   mg
Gokshru                      Tribulus terrestris                 Seed                      25   mg
Kawanch                      Mucuna pruriens                     Seed (processed)          25   mg
Shatawari                    Asparagus racemosus                 Root                      25   mg
Salam Musali                 Bombax malabaricum                  Young root                25   mg
Jaiphal                      Myristica fragrans                  Fruit                     25   mg
Suvaran Bhasam               Gold (Processed)                    –                         25   mg
334 Some Rasayana formulations
Spy (Yogi Pharmacy)

Sex tonic

Ayurvedic name             Botanical/English name                         Part used                Quantity
Sarpgandha                 Rauvolﬁa serpentina                            Root                     22.5   mg
Kuchla (shodhit)           Strychnos nux vomica                           Seed (processed)         22.5   mg
Salam Mishri               Orchis mascula                                 Root                     33.0   mg
Jaiphal                    Nutmeg                                         Fruit                    25.5   mg
Javitri                    Mace                                           Aril on seed             25.5   mg
Akrakara                   Anacyclus pyrethrum                            Root                     25.5   mg
Shilajit                   Bitumen material                               Paste                    25.5   mg
Makardhawaj                Red sulphide of mercury with gold              –                        16.5   mg
Trinkantmani gum           Azima tetracantha?                             Gum                      16.5   mg
Vang Bhasam                Tin                                            Processed                16.5   mg
Kesar                      Saffron                                        Styles                   16.5   mg
Amber                      Ambergris                                      Oleoresin                16.5   mg
Mukta pishti               Pearl pulverized                               Paste                     6.6   mg
Jund Badastar              Castoreum                                      Oleoresin                 6.6   mg
Kadali ras                 Banana stem                                    Juice                    13.2   mg
Processed in the decoction and fresh juice of Pueraria tuberosa, Withania somnifera, Asparagus racemosus, Aloe
barbadensis, Curcuma longa and Cannabis sativa.


Strenex (Zandu)

Vitality aid. tones health

Ayurvedic name                 Botanical/English name                  Part used                    Quantity
Ashwgandha                     Withania somnifera                      Root                         100   mg
Kawanch                        Mucuna pruriens                         Seed (processed)             150   mg
Chandrodya Ras                 Red sulphide of mercury                 –                            100   mg
Manikya Bhasam                 Ruby                                    Processed                    100   mg
Mukta Pishti                   Pearl                                   Paste                        100   mg
Abhrak Bhasam                  Mica                                    Processed                     50   mg
Shilajit                       Bituminous compound                     Paste                         50   mg
Kuchla (mitigated)             Strychnos nux-vomica                    Seed (processed)              25   mg
Kantloha                       Wrought iron                            Processed                     20   mg
Jaiphal                        Nutmeg                                  Seed Powder                   20   mg
Mankiya Ras                    Arsenic                                 Processed                     10   mg
Bhimseni kapoor                Borneol                                 Crystals                       5   mg
Amber                          Ambergris                               Resin                          5   mg
                                                                      Some Rasayana formulations              335
Tentex forte (Himalaya Drug)

Sex stimulant for men

Ayurvedic name             Botanical/English name                        Part used                      Quantity
Lata Kasturi               Ablemoschus moschatus                         Seed Extract                   10   mg
Ashwgandha                 Withania somnifera                            Root                           65   mg
Vidhara                    Argyreia nervosa                              Seed                           32   mg
Kawanch                    Mucuna pruriens                               Seed (processed)               32   mg
Trivanga bhasam            Processed lead, tin and zinc                  –                              32   mg
Shilajit                   Bituminous compound                           –                              32   mg
Kesar                      Saffron                                       Styles and Stigma              25   mg
Kuchla Shodhit             Nux vomica                                    Seed (processed)               16   mg
Makardhawaj                Red sulphide of mercury (gold)                –                              16   mg
Salam mishri               Orchis mascula                                Root                           16   mg
Akrakara                   Anacyclus pyrethrum                           Root                           16   mg
Bala                       Sida cordifolia                               Seed                           16   mg
Semal Musli                Salmalia malabarica                           Root                           16   mg
Kali Mirch                 Black pepper                                  Seed                            5   mg
Processed in the juice of Sida, Asparagus, Ipomoea digitata, Piper betle, Withania, Tribulus, Tinospora, Argyreia,
Acacia arabica and Dashmool (ten roots).

Trasina (Dey’s Medical Stores)

Antistress immunomodulater

Ayurvedic name                  Botanical/English name                   Part used                      Quantity
Ashwgandha                      Withania somnifera                       Root Extract                    90   mg
Tulsi                           Ocimum sanctum                           Leaf Extract                   190   mg
Shilajit                        Bituminous mineral                       Paste                           20   mg
Gaduchi                         Tinospora cordifolia                     Herb Extract                    10   mg
Kutaki                          Picrorhiza kurroa                        Root Extract                    10   mg
Bhringraja                      Eclipta alba                             Root Extract                    10   mg


Vitox (Maxo Lab.)

General sex tonic

Ayurvedic name                  Botanical name                         Part used                        Quantity
Vidarikand                      Ipomaea paniculata                     Root                             60   mg
Safed musli                     Asparagus adscendens                   Root                             60   mg
Shatawari                       A. racemosus                           Root                             60   mg
Gokshru                         Tribulus terrestris                    Fruit                            60   mg
Ashwgandha                      Withania somnifera                     Root                             60   mg
Kawanch                         Mucuna pruriens                        Seed (processed)                 25   mg
Salam Panja                     Orchis latifolia                       Root                             25   mg
Nakchikni                       Centipeda orbicularis                  Seed                             25   mg
Akrakara                        Anacyclus pyrethrum                    Root                             15   mg
Agar                            Aquilaria agallocha                    Heart wood                       15   mg
Jaiphal                         Myristica fragrans                     Fruit                            15   mg
Lata Kasturi                    Abelomoschus moschatus                 Seed                              5   mg
336 Some Rasayana formulations
Vysex (Ban Pharm)

Rejuvenator, increases virility

Ayurvedic name      Botanical/English name                 Part used            Quantity
Ashwgandha          Withania somnifera                     Root                 80 mg extract
Kavanch             Mucuna pruriens                        Seed (processed)     80 mg extract
Silajit             Bituminous matter                      Paste                10 mg
Bala beej           Sida cordifolia                        Seed                 40 mg extract
Kesar               Saffron                                Styles and stigma     0.5 mg
Vishtinduk          Nux vomica                             Seed (processed)     15 mg
Akarakara           Anacyclus pyrethrum                    Root                 40 mg
Makardhawaj         Red sulphide of mercury with gold      –                    10 mg
Jundebastoor        Castoreum                              Resin                 4.5 mg
Rasa Sindur         Red sulphide of mercury                –                    10 mg
