Kapha Balancing Daily
Routine
Kapha Balancing
ROUtING
Daily
Yoga Veda Institute

Balancing Kapha Dosha
Nearly everywhere we look in nature, there are creatures engaging in some
sort of consistent daily routine. The natural world at large is deeply
inuenced by the rhythms of nature – the rising and setting of the sun, the
cycles of the seasons, and the underlying impulses directing the broader
community of life. While there is often some degree of seasonal variation,
many plants and animals embrace a predictable daily rhythm and, as a rule,
live by it. As humans, we have largely gotten away from this habit. Modern
forms of energy allow us to heat and cool our homes and businesses, light
the darkness, and engage with life at all hours of the day and night. Many of
us even have jobs and other obligations that require us to keep irregular
schedules. The increasingly erratic nature of our lives is inherently
taxing. Layer that on top of the busyness and stress that pervades modern
life, and it is no wonder that so many of our nervous systems now exist in a
chronic state of high alert – hyper-vigilant, increasingly unable to relax.

Balancing Kapha Dosha
But at the most fundamental level, our physiology is very much adapted to –
and supported by – some sense of regularity. Actually, this is precisely why
the daily routine is such potent medicine. In eect, having a daily routine
oers the grounding, stability, and predictability that are largely absent from
our hectic modern lives. The routine itself creates a number of familiar and
comforting reference points throughout each day that send a resounding
armation to the deep tissues of the body that all is well, that we can be at
ease. And so, when the body becomes accustomed to – and learns to count
on – a daily routine that includes things like adequate rest, appropriate
exercise, and a nourishing spiritual practice, the nervous system can nally
begin to relax. As a result, a daily routine can elicit profound rejuvenation
throughout the body without requiring any conscious awareness of the
healing process.
1
But adopting a daily routine is also a very purposeful and enduring act of
self-love. Each day, our routines provide us with a tangible opportunity to
prioritize our own health and wellbeing, regardless of what else might be
going on in our lives. They quickly become poignant reminders that we are in
fact worthy of a healthy dose of loving attention every single day. The
cumulative affect of caring for ourselves in this way is quite powerful. And for
many, committing to a daily routine results in a greatly improved sense of
wellness in a very short period of time.

Balancing Kapha Dosha
Creating A Manageable Routine
Some aspects of an Ayurvedic daily routine are very quick and easy to
incorporate into your day, regardless of your schedule. Other practices
require some concerted eort and a strong level of commitment. If
establishing a daily routine is entirely new to you – and even if it isn’t – it’s
important not to get overwhelmed. As you can imagine, taking on too much
too soon tends to cause more stress than it relieves, so it’s important to be
realistic about how much you should start with. A good strategy might be to
add as many “little things” as you feel truly inspired to do, and then to take
on only 3-5 more signicant commitments. If you tend to make things too
easy for yourself, err on the side of 5 substantial new additions to your day.
And no matter how appealing each practice may sound, it is far more
important to be able to stick to your commitments consistently than to try
to do everything. A routine can have a soothing eect on your entire
organism, but much of the benet will be lost if you can’t do it regularly. In
this respect, less truly is more.
Remember, the idea is to facilitate a sense of predictability in certain
aspects of your life so that your being has a place to come home to
throughout the day – regardless of what other curve balls might crop up as
your day unfolds. You will always be able to add to your routine later. In fact,
as time goes on, you may notice that your routine becomes almost
eortless. Instead of pouring a bunch of energy into making it happen every
day, it simply becomes habit and you no longer have to think about it. This is
the time to think about layering in new practices.

Balancing Kapha Dosha
Where to Begin?
If you read the classic texts of Ayurveda, one thing stands out about the
recommended daily routine: it is heavily focused on the early morning
hours. Most of the recommended practices are done upon waking and are
completed before breakfast. Consider the cosmic peace and serenity that is
accessible in the hours just before sunrise. This time of day embodies an
inherent stillness. It is as if the entire atmosphere is imbued with the
qualities of tranquility, peace, compassion, and love. As a result, the early
morning hours are an especially powerful time to engage in loving self-care,
reective practice, and the intention to heal or re-pattern the
physiology. Beyond that, this is the timeframe that sets the tone for our
entire day. Which is to say, the early morning is a great place to start when
establishing a routine. When we care deeply for ourselves every morning, we
create enormous potential for positive change – truly transformational
potential. Changing your morning really can change your life.
The Traditional Ayurvedic Morning Routine
What follows is a brief description of a traditional Ayurvedic morning
routine. Remember, this is the ideal. Please do not try to do all of this
tomorrow morning. We’ve included all of these practices and a brief
description of their benets because dierent elements of the routine will
speak to dierent individuals. As you read through this list, pay close
attention to which elements stir the deepest response in your body. Those
practices will usually be the best ones to start with.

Balancing Kapha Dosha
Wake Up Between 3am and 6am
The classics recommend that we rise during the “ambrosial hours” of the
morning, sometime between 3am and 6am. This is a vata time of day; the
atmosphere is infused with lightness and clarity, which helps us to more
easily awaken. Equally important, this time of day is regarded as being the
most conducive for creating a connection with our deepest inner nature
and consciousness. Waking during this particular timeframe is not necessary
for children, the elderly, or for those who are sick, pregnant, or breast-
feeding. Regardless of what time works best for you, your daily routine will
be most benecial if you wake up at a consistent time from one day to the
next.
Eliminate
Empty the bladder and the bowels. Ayurveda views morning elimination as a
natural and essential element of daily hygiene and health. If you do not
typically have a bowel movement rst thing in the morning, some of the
below practices (like drinking warm water) may help you regulate this
function in your body. Or, consider taking triphala to support healthy and
regular elimination.

Balancing Kapha Dosha
Scrape Tongue
This simple hygiene practice removes bacteria and toxins that have
accumulated on the tongue overnight. It also serves to stimulate and
cleanse the digestive tract and the vital organs. So while tongue scraping is
considered an important element of daily oral hygiene, it also supports the
natural detoxication of the system at large. Another benet of scraping the
tongue is that it allows us to take notice of the coating on our tongues each
morning and to begin to see how our dietary choices and lifestyle habits
inuence our overall health from one day to the next. A tongue
cleaner made of stainless steel is balancing for all doshas. When you are
finished, rinse with clean water and spit.
Brush Teeth
While this practice is already familiar to all of us, Ayurveda recommends
cleaning the teeth with herbs that promote oral health – like neem – which
are typically bitter, astringent, or pungent in taste.

Balancing Kapha Dosha
Drink Warm Water
Drinking a glass of warm water cleanses and awakens the digestive tract,
hydrates the tissues, and promotes peristalsis – which can encourage a
bowel movement, even when there is a tendency toward sluggishness or
constipation. It is best to drink water only after the mouth and the tongue
have been cleansed so as not to swallow the bacteria and toxins that have
accumulated in the mouth overnight.
Swish & Gargle with Pulling Oil
It is said that swishing and gargling with warm oil lends strength to the teeth,
gums, jaw, and voice, while improving the sense of taste. Spit the oil out
after you have held and swished it in your mouth for the desired period of
time. This practice can be done briey, for 1-2 minutes, or for as long as 15
minutes. If a longer swish and gargle is appealing, consider doing it during
abhyanga (see below), or while completing other aspects of your morning
routine.
Massage Gums with Pulling Oil
Use your clean index nger to gently massage a bit of Daily Swish oil into
your gums. This practice further benets the teeth and gums by increasing
circulation in these tissues and encouraging absorption of the oil.
Splash Cold Water in the Eyes
Our eyes work very hard all day and they tend to accumulate a lot of
heat. Splashing a bit of cold water into each eye in the morning helps to
cool, sooth, and relax the eyes, but also helps us to feel more vibrantly
awake.

Balancing Kapha Dosha
Meditation, Pranayama, Prayer, or Quiet Reflection
If the central purpose of a morning routine is to calm the nervous system
and ground the being before the day begins, then meditation, pranayama,
prayer, or quiet reection are perhaps its most essential elements. You may
already have a practice that speaks to you. If not, simply sitting quietly and
breathing slowly and deeply for a few minutes can have a tremendously
beneficial effect.
Movement
Making time to move our bodies in an appropriate way in the morning is
both energizing and motivating. It supports natural detoxication by
promoting healthy circulation and by helping to move stagnation from the
organs and tissues. It also helps to loosen and awaken the body and the
joints. Early morning is a very supportive time for almost anyone to exercise
because of the strengthening and stabilizing inuence of kapha, (which is
prevalent in the atmosphere from about 6am-10am). If it is not possible for
you to exercise in the early morning, early evening is a good alternative
(about 6pm – 10pm), preferably before dinner.

Balancing Kapha Dosha
Yoga
As a sister science of Ayurveda, yoga is a natural part of an Ayurvedic
daily routine. However, dierent individuals will benet from dierent
types of yoga, depending on their constitution and current state of
balance. For kapha-predominant types, a more invigorating form of
yoga – such as kapha-pacifying yoga – that emphasizes strengthening
and stimulation is usually most appropriate.
Other Forms of Exercise
Ayurveda recommends dierent types and intensities of exercise for
dierent constitutions and imbalances. In general, Ayurveda suggests
that we exercise to only about 50% of our capacity – until we break a
mild sweat on the forehead, under the arms, and along the spine, or
until the rst sign of dryness in the mouth). For kapha-predominant
types, the ideal exercise program is typically quite vigorous and
challenging. Appropriate forms of exercise for kapha types include brisk
walking, jogging, biking, hiking, martial arts, and other forms of strength-
building, aerobic exercise.
Abhyanga (Ayurvedic Oil Massage)
This ancient practice of self-massage with oil calms the nervous system,
lubricates and rejuvenates the tissues, and promotes healthy circulation
throughout the body. It is no coincidence that the Sanskrit word for
oil, sneha, also means love. Abhyanga is a profound practice of rejuvenation
and loving self-care that benets both the physical body and the more
subtle realms of consciousness. Each morning, before a shower or bath,
massage about 1/4 cup warm Kapha Massage Oil or Organic Sesame Oil into
the skin.

Balancing Kapha Dosha
Apply Warm Oil to the Ears
The ears are closely related to vata dosha (which is easily aggravated by
modern life). Lubricating the ears with warm, untoasted sesame oil regularly
can help to pacify vata in general, but can also support the sense of hearing,
prevent stiness in the neck by lubricating local tissues, and encourage
healthy TMJ function. You can use an eyedropper to place about 10 drops of
warm sesame oil in one ear at a time – letting it sit for several minutes
before draining any excess and then repeat the process on the other
side. Or, you can simply use the tip of your pinky nger to lubricate the
inside of each ear with a bit of sesame oil.
Apply Warm Oil to the Top of the Head
Oiling the head and scalp is deeply soothing and can help to prevent
headaches, hair loss, and greying. It also supports each of the sense organs
and encourages sound sleep.
Foot Massage
Our feet literally carry us through each day. Massaging them each morning,
focusing on the soles in particular, is a very grounding and nurturing
practice. But because various points on the feet correlate with organs and
tissues throughout the body, it also supports proper vision, relieves stress,
and offers many other systemic benefits.
Cleanse or Lubricate the Nasal Passages
There are two Ayurvedic practices that support clean, clear nasal passages
and clarity of mind. Both of these practices are best done on an empty
stomach, usually early in the morning. They each have distinct energies and
benets, so if you chose to try them both, it is best to separate them by at
least a day (i.e. don’t follow nasal rinse immediately with nasya or visa versa).

Balancing Kapha Dosha
Nasal Rinse
Nasal rinse is a practice of pouring warm salt water through the nasal
passages to moisten the mucus membranes and cleanse the nasal
passages of dust, dirt, pollen, and excess mucus. If you nd that your
nasal passages feel dry afterwards, you can use your pinky nger to
lubricate the nostrils with a bit of sesame oil or ghee when you’re
finished or at another time of day (i.e. as part of your bedtime routine).
Nasya
Nasya is the practice of applying medicated oil to the nasal passages to
soothe these delicate tissues, promote unobstructed breathing, relieve
accumulated stress, and support mental clarity. This practice is also
said to improve the quality of the voice and to strengthen vision. Nasya
should not be performed by pregnant or menstruating women. Each
morning, nd a comfortable place to lie in the supine position (on your
back), tilting your head upside down. You may nd it helpful to hang
your head o the edge of a bed or bolster, so that the top of your crown
is parallel with the oor. Once in position, apply 3-5 drops of Nasya
Oil into each nostril, sning the oil inward and massaging the face,
forehead, and scalp to encourage the oil to move up into the sinuses
and head. Relax for a minute or two to allow the oil to absorb before
slowly getting up.
Massage the Body With Dry Powder
Massaging the body with soft powders (like chickpea or rice ours),
stimulates movement of the lymph, balances kapha, encourages circulation,
liquees fat, bolsters the health of the skin, and lends strength and tone to
the tissues of the body. It can also help to remove excess oil from the skin
following abhyanga.

Balancing Kapha Dosha
Bathe
Bathing is a very important part of the traditional Ayurvedic routine. It is said
to cleanse and purify the body, to bring energy and alertness to the being,
and to promote longevity. Use soap only where necessary. If you’ve done
abhyanga, rinsing the skin with warm water will generally suce to remove
excess oil.
Breakfast Time
Establishing a consistent time for breakfast is a great way to ensure that we
have time to eat our rst meal mindfully and that we start our day well
nourished. The content of your breakfast should be seasonally appropriate
and supportive of your unique constitution or imbalance.
During the Day
While the bulk of a traditional Ayurvedic routine is performed in the
morning, there are a handful of things that we can do throughout the day to
enhance the benefits of having a daily routine.
Establish Consistent Times for Meals
This is a very simple way to create consistency for our bodies. It supports
digestion, ensures that we eat at optimal times, reduces the propensity for
snacking, and helps calm the nervous system by establishing another
predictable pattern that our bodies can rely on.
Establish Lunch as the Main Meal
The digestive re is strongest at mid-day, from about 10am to 2pm. This is
therefore the best time to eat our main meal – especially for kapha-types,
who can easily tend toward sluggish digestion. This also allows us to enjoy a
lighter evening meal, which supports sound sleep and deepens the body’s
capacity for rejuvenation each night.

Balancing Kapha Dosha
Implement a Consistent Work Schedule
While this is not entirely possible for everyone, do it to the extent that it is
possible for you. This provides another avenue toward predictability and
supports a deeper sense of calm within the nervous system.
Keep An Appropriate Pace
Sometimes, it is important for kapha-types to honor their own internal pace
– which may be slow and steady – as opposed to the vata or pitta tendencies
to be frantic or obsessive. Our culture tends to shame being slow, but for
kapha-types, slow and steady usually works. That said, kapha loves the sense
of leisure, so an appropriate pace may also mean nding a wellspring of
motivation to push through any heaviness that starts to drag us down. If we
can balance honoring who we are with reaching for our personal best, we
can begin to re-pattern one of kapha’s core struggles and ultimately, are
much better equipped to keep kapha healthy and balanced.

Balancing Kapha Dosha
Allow Adequate (But Not Excessive) Time For Rest
Again, kapha tends to overindulge in rest rather than skimp on it. Rest is
indeed important and rejuvenating, so make sure you are getting enough,
but be honest with yourself about how much you need (for most kapha-
types, around 7 hours per night is plenty). If you’re waking up sluggish,
chances are you’re sleeping too late or for too many hours.
Designate Time(s) to Take Herbal Remedies
Taking your herbs at the same time each day is the best way to ensure that
you take your herbs regularly. It also benets the body – in much the same
way that eating meals at regular times is beneficial.
An Evening Routine
The evening routine is critically important because it lays the foundation for
success with the morning routine.
An evening routine can be as simple as establishing a consistent dinnertime
and bedtime. Or, it can incorporate a few simple practices. Here are some
nice things to consider.

Balancing Kapha Dosha
Stick to A Consistent Dinner Time
a we
HY
Ideally, we would eat dinner early enough that our food has time to move
completely out of the stomach before we go to bed. This means allowing
your body a minimum of 2-3 hours between dinner and bedtime. It may also
mean eating a lighter dinner than we might otherwise be accustomed
to. These practices allow for proper digestion, prevent the unnecessary
accumulation of toxins, and support healthy sleep patterns.
Take Triphala
Triphala is a traditional Ayurvedic formula comprised of three fruits that is
balancing for vata, pitta, and kapha. It is revered for its unique ability to
gently cleanse and detoxify the digestive tract while replenishing, nourishing,
and rejuvenating the tissues. About half an hour before bed, steep ½
teaspoontriphala powder in a cup of freshly boiled water for 10
minutes. Cool and drink. Or, take 2 triphala tablets with a glass of warm
water.

Balancing Kapha Dosha
Create a Brief “Bedtime Routine”
The idea here is to create a simple series of events that helps to signal your
body that the day is winding down and that you will be going to sleep
soon. This practice can be incredibly helpful in supporting our ability to
surrender to sleep. It is important that these activities be consistent from
one day to the next. A bedtime routine might include things like:
Brushing the teeth
Washing the face
Applying oil to the feet and scalp
Other soothing, quieting activities that appeal to you
Note: Reading in bed is not recommended, as it disrupts the desired
association between being in bed and sleeping. If you like to read before
bed, designate a specic place – other than your bed – and enjoy. But keep
in mind that reading before bed can be quite stimulating to the eyes and the
mind, which can disrupt healthy sleep patterns. If you tend to struggle with
disturbed sleep, you might want to try giving up your bedtime book for a
while to see if you notice a difference in your quality of sleep.
Establish a Consistent Bedtime
The trick here is to be consistent. Having predictable sleep and wake times
helps our bodies naturally attune to a daily rhythm. It is often helpful to
work backward from your desired wake time and establish a sleep time that
ensures that you get enough rest each night without being excessive. This is
a beautiful way for us to honor our need for sleep and to ensure that an
appropriate amount of rest is built into each day.

Balancing Kapha Dosha
Other Considerations That May Alter Your
Routine
You may also nd that there is good reason to deviate occasionally from this
traditional kapha-pacifying routine.
Seasonal Adjustments
Each of the seasons arrives with its own unique personality. We can support
an improved state of balance throughout the year by making a conscious
eort to live in harmony with the cycles of nature and by making small
adjustments in our routines in order to accommodate the arrival of each
new season.
Adjustments for Imbalances
Similarly, if we are dealing with imbalances that do not line up precisely with
our constitutions, it is often helpful to adopt a routine that pacies the
dosha(s) that are most aggravated.
YOGA
VEDA:

Balancing Kapha Dosha
According to Ayurveda, each day, season, and life has inherent rhythm. You
can feel it right? Try this. Feel into the energy of the day at dawn. It’s light and
clear, expansive and potent. Now sense the energy at 9am. It’s heavier, more
demanding and cluttered. Which would be the better time to meditate?

Balancing Kapha Dosha
Dinacharya, the Sanskrit word for daily routine, is a simple and eective way
to balance the body. Our daily activities have a profound eect on our
health. A routine, practiced daily, is stronger medicine than an occasional
remedy. Dinacharya establishes healthful habits through attunement of the
body to the natural.

Balancing Kapha Dosha
Most medicine comes with side eects. What’s really swell is when the side
eects are good. One of Ayurveda’s powerful tools for healing and change is
called dinacharya: a healthy daily routine. A healthy dinacharya may help
heal physical and mental maladies, but a less obvious benefit is its effect.
References
Welch, Claudia. Balance Your Hormones, Balance Your Life. Da Capo Press,
1
2011. 45.
Vagbhata. Ashtanga Hrdayam. Chowkhamba Krishnadas Academy,
2
Varanasi. 2007. Translated by Prof. K.R. Srikantha Murthy. Ashtanga
Hrdayam: Sutrasthana: II: 1.
3 Welch, Claudia. “Dinacharya: Changing Lives Through Daily Living.” 2007. 8-
13. Online Version of Article.
Pole, Sebastian. Ayurvedic Medicine: The Principles of Traditional
4
Practice. Churchill Livingston Elsevier, 2006. 48.
Lad, Vasant. The Complete Book of Ayurvedic Home Remedies. Three Rivers
5
Press, 1998. 56-64.
