Herbal medicines constitute the main component of traditional medicine,
which have been used since thousands of years. They have made
significant contribution to human health through their health promotive,
curative and rehabilitative properties and in the prevention of illnesses.
Indeed, many herbal remedies used traditionally have become modern
medicines through drug development. Digoxin, morphine, colchicine, and
artemisinin are some notable examples. Long tradition of use of many
herbal remedies and experiences passed on from generation to generation
has brought about reliance by the people on herbal remedies. At present,
the use of medicinal plants for health benefits is increasing worldwide.

It is an attempt to promote the rational, safe and appropriate use of
herbal medicines and mainstreaming of traditionally used herbal
remedies. This manual can be used by health planners, policy makers,
national and district health authorities and others involved in the health
sector development and reform. It is also an attempt to increase
availability and accessibility to cost-effective treatment of commonly
encountered health problems with herbal remedies. It will be useful for
education and training of community health workers as well. These efforts
would eventually promote 'health for all' in the context of primary health
care.

ISBN 978 92 9022 382 5

World Health House
Indraprastha Estate,
Mahatma Gandhi Marg,
New Delhi-110002, India
Website: www.searo.who.int

9 789290 223825

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

This publication contains 28 monographs on common ailments which
can be readily treated with simple herbal remedies. They can be prepared
easily and used within the ambit of primary health care. Each monograph
provides description of the ailment, the form of traditional preparation, its
composition, English name, Latin name and family of the plant, plant part
used, main chemical constituents, quality standards, method of
preparation, dosage form, therapeutic properties, indications and uses,
dose and mode of administration, precautions and safety aspects, and
important references.

Traditional Herbal Remedies
for Primary Health Care

Captions for photographs in the front cover:
Upper row, Left to Right: Pods of Elettaria cardamomum Linn. and Holarrhena
antidysenterica Roxb. ex Flem.
Lower row, Left to Right: Fruits of Phyllanthus emblica Linn. and Terminalia chebula Retz.

Traditional Herbal Remedies
for Primary Health Care

WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication data
World Health Organization, Regional Office for South-East Asia.
Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care.
1. Medicine, Herbal.
4. Plants, Medicinal.

2. Medicine, Traditional.
5. Primary Health Care.

ISBN 978-92-9022-382-5

3. Complementary Therapies.
(NLM classification: WB 925)

© World Health Organization 2010
All rights reserved.
Requests for publications, or for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications
– whether for sale or for noncommercial distribution – can be obtained from Publishing
and Sales, World Health Organization, Regional Office for South-East Asia, Indraprastha
Estate, Mahatma Gandhi Marg, New Delhi 110 002, India (fax: +91 11 23370197;
e-mail: publications@searo.who.int).
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do
not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health
Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of
its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted
lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full
agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply
that they are endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference
to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the
names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify
the information contained in this publication. However, the published material is being
distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility
for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall the
World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use.
This publication does not necessarily represent the decisions or policies of the World
Health Organization.
Printed in India

iii

Contents

Acknowledgements.................................................................. v
Glossary................................................................................ vii
Foreword.............................................................................. viii
1.

Acidity and gastritis

Amalaki powder................................ 1

2.

Common cold

Trikatu powder................................. 7

3.

Conjunctivitis

Daruharidra decoction.......................13

4.

Constipation

Haritaki powder...............................17

5.

Cough

Pippali powder.................................23

6.

Diarrhoea

Kutaja powder.................................31

7.

Earache

Lashuna oil......................................37

8.

Eczema

Shirisha powder...............................43

9.

Eye discharge

Triphala decoction............................49

10. Fever

Kiratatikta powder............................55

11. Fungal dermatosis

Karanja powder...............................61

12. Headache

Pippalimoola powder.........................67

13. Indigestion

Chaturbhadra decoction....................71

14. Jaundice

Katuka powder.................................79

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

iv

15. Joint Pain

Ajamoda powder..............................85

16. Leucorrhoea

Lodhra powder.................................91

17. Lice Infestation

Dhattura paste.................................97

18. Malaise

Ashvagandha powder......................105

19. Painful menstruation

Shatpushpa powder........................111

20. Parasitic infestation

Palasha powder..............................117

21. Piles (haemorrhoids)

Surana powder..............................125

22. Scabies

Gandhaka ointment........................129

23. Sexual dysfunction

Kapikacchu powder.........................135

24. Sprain

Haridra powder and paste...............141

25. Toothache

Lavanga oil....................................147

26. Urinary disorder

Gokshura powder...........................151

27. Vomiting

Ela powder....................................157

28. Wound

Haridra powder..............................163

v

Acknowledgements

The World Health Organization gratefully acknowledges the active
participation and technical contributions of various collaborators in
the preparation of this publication. These include:
Editors: Dr D.C. Katoch, National Consultant (Traditional Medicine
& Homeopathy), WHO Country Office for India and Dr K. Shein,
Traditional Medicine Programme, WHO Regional Office for South-East
Asia, New Delhi.
Project Operational Officers: Prof. M.S. Baghel and Dr A. B.
Thakar, Institute of Postgraduate Teaching & Research in Ayurveda
(IPGTRA), Jamnagar (Gujarat).
Experts for Technical Review and Finalization of Monographs:
Prof. Gurdip Singh, Hassan (Karnataka); Prof. E. Surendran, Kottakal
(Kerala); Prof. R.R. Dwivedi, Jamnagar (Gujarat); Prof H.M. Chandola,
Jamnagar (Gujarat); Prof. B.L. Mehra, Paprola (Himachal Pradesh);
Dr A. B. Thakar, Jamnagar (Gujarat); Dr (Mrs.) Surinder Katoch,
New Delhi; Dr Shilpa Donga, Jamnagar (Gujarat); Dr Mandeep Kaur,
Jamnagar (Gujarat); Dr P.K. Debnath, Kolkata (West Bengal); Dr
A.B. Dey, New Delhi; Dr K. Shein (Traditional Medicine Programme,
WHO Regional Office for South-East Asia, New Delhi; and Dr D. C.
Katoch, WHO Country Office for India, New Delhi.
Contributors for Monographs Development: Dr D.C. Katoch,
WHO Country Office for India, New Delhi and Dr A. B. Thakar, Prof.
K.S. Dhiman, Dr R. Manjusha, Dr R.N. Acharya, Dr S.K. Gupta, Dr
H.A. Vyas, Dr B.R. Patel, Dr Shilpa Donga, Dr D.B. Vaghela, Dr Galib,
Dr Darshana Pandya, Dr V.K. Kori, Dr T.S. Doodhamal, Dr Mandeep
Kaur and Dr Rajgopal Bhatt from IPGTRA, Jamnagar.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

vi

For Photographs: Institute of Postgraduate Teaching & Research
in Ayurveda, Jamnagar; National Medicinal Plants Board, New Delhi;
State Medicinal Plants Garden (State Medicinal Plants Board), Nadia
(West Bengal); Ramakrishna Mission Herbal Garden Unit, Kolkata;
Foundation for Revitalization of Local Health Traditions, Bangalore;
Dr Sanjeev Lale, Indore; Dr T.K. Biswas, Kolkata; Dr A.K. Mitra,
Kolkata; Dr P.K. Debnath, Kolkata; Mr B. Pramanik; Kolkata; Dr P.M.
Varrier, Kottakal; Dr Y.K. Sharma, Paprola; Dr G.V.R. Joseph, New
Delhi; and Dr A. Saraswathy, Chennai.
Facilitation and guidance: Mr Sunil Nandraj, National
Professional Officer (Health Systems Development), WHO Country
Office for India, New Delhi.
The WHO Regional Office for South-East Asia is also grateful
to all other contributors in the preparation and publication of these
monographs.

vii

Glossary

Churna

Fine powder of the medicine.

Ghrita

Ghrita or Ghee is obtained by heating butter at high
temperature and it is almost anhydrous milk fat.

Kvatha

Kvatha is a liquid prepared by boiling a herbal drug in
water till one fourth of water remains and filtered.

Lepa

Local application of paste of the medicine.

Malahara

Semisolid preparation containing a medicine for external
application.

Taila

Oil extracted from seeds of the plants.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

viii

Foreword

Traditional systems of medicines, including
herbal medicines, have been used for many
centuries for health care by people in countries
of the South-East Asia Region as well as in
other parts of the world. Traditional medicine
continues to be a valuable source of remedies
that have been used by millions of people
around the world to secure their health. It has
been developed from empirical experiences
and from observations made by people who
use them. It embodies age-old wisdom and knowledge accrued over
thousands of years, and forms an integral part of the social and
cultural heritage of peoples and countries. The system has been
inherited and handed down from one generation to the next by
custom and tradition.
Since the concept of “Health for All” through primary health care
(PHC) was launched at the International Conference on Primary Health
Care at Alma-Ata in 1978, there has been a global movement to
realize universal health-care coverage. However, in spite of advances
made in the health sector, equitable health care coverage; availability,
accessibility and affordability to conventional health care and services
are quite often beyond the reach of people who are indigent,
marginalized and underserved. Moreover, the present upsurge in
the use of traditional medicines or complementary and alternative
medicine – generated after the Alma-Ata International Conference
– has become a global phenomenon. This development portends
well for a more comprehensive health care delivery and health
sector reform in facing new challenges in PHC due to demographic,
economic, environmental, and social changes that have a negative
impact on health development.

ix

The revitalization of primary health care in 2008 was yet another
clarion call for governments, all health and development workers
and the world community to protect and promote the health of all
people. In these efforts, the rich resources of traditional and herbal
remedies are available and accessible to all who choose to use them
– by tradition or cultural acceptance in the far and remote corners
of countries or by choice of those in the affluent urban communities
where there is a desire to return to nature and to use natural remedies
in taking care of their own health.
The global health scenario is facing new challenges due to global
warming and economic down-turn that are now threatening health
development. It is therefore crucial that all systems of medicine –
whether conventional or traditional – in so far as they are beneficial
and not deleterious to the health and well-being of the people must
play their respective roles in promoting health, in preventing disease,
in curing the sick, and in rehabilitating the infirm. It is through these
concerted efforts that tangible gains can be achieved.
It is envisaged that this publication will be instrumental in
revitalizing primary health care in empowering community participation
in self-care, in promoting the application of appropriate technology
that is socially and culturally acceptable to the people, in making
the health system more people-centered, and in improving equitable
access to national health systems.

Dr Samlee Pliangbangchang
Regional Director

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

1

1
Amalaki powder for acidity and gastritis

Heartburn is due to excessive secretion of gastric acid or its reflux to
the food pipe along with delayed gastric emptying and fermentation of
food. Gastric acidity and inflammation of the stomach is called gastritis,
which produces a common symptom of burning sensation in the middle
part of the upper half of the abdomen, while acid reflux causes throat
and heartburn and delayed gastric emptying with fermentation leads
to gaseous distension of abdomen and belching. These abnormalities
lead to symptoms like nausea, loss of appetite, indigestion and mild
to moderate upper abdominal pain and distress.
Frequent dietary irregularities and ingestion of irritant materials
like too spicy and sour foods, alcohol and analgesic drugs like
aspirin are the common causes of acidity and gastritis. Mental stress
significantly aggravates the symptoms of acidity and gastritis.
Ayurveda designates the symptom complex of acid peptic disease
as Amlapitta attributed to the impairment of digestive juices and
protective lining of stomach. Improperly treated acidity may lead to
peptic ulcer due to damage in the mucosal lining of the stomach and
duodenum. Judicious use of Amalaki powder is effective in successful
management of acidity and gastritis with certain do’s and dont’s
described in the Ayurvedic texts:
(1) It is advisable not to overeat and have long gaps between
meals. Small frequent meals of soft and easily digestible food
items should be taken.
(2) Consumption of raw and leafy vegetables, fried, spicy, sour,
salty, heavy and improperly cooked food, sheep’s milk, alcohol,
curd, sesame seeds should be avoided.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

2

(3) Use of vegetables with bitter taste such as bitter gourd, banana
flowers, and pumpkin, pomegranate, honey, boiled and cooled
water and food grains like wheat, rice and barley is beneficial
in patients with acidity and gastritis.
(4) Suppression of natural urges, particularly of vomiting and
passing stools should be avoided.

Amalaki (Phyllanthus emblica Linn.)
The formulation is made from the dried mature fruits of Amalaki,
which is a small or medium-sized tree found abundantly in mixed
deciduous forests and cultivated in gardens and home yards. Ripe
fruits are collected in late winter or early summer and are dried
in shade. Dried fruits are then separated from the seeds and are
kept in airtight plastic bags or boxes under dry storage conditions.
Extensive uses of Amalaki as medicine and tonic are described in
Indian Medicine and the medicinal plant is included in the Ayurvedic
Pharamacopoeia of India1.
Composition: The formulation is a fine powder made of single herbal
ingredient Amalaki.
English name

Indian gooseberry

Latin name

Phyllanthus emblica (Linn.)

Family

Phyllanthaceae

Plant part used

Fruit

A leafy branch of Amalaki with fruits.

Dried fruits of Amalaki.

Main chemical constituents2: Vitamin C, minerals and aminoacids.

3

Quality standards3
Purity and strength of dried mature fruits of Amalaki is determined
on the basis of:
Foreign matter

Not more than 3%

Total ash

Not more than 7%

Acid insoluble ash

Not more than 2%

Acid-soluble extractive

Not less than 40%

Water-soluble extractive

Not less than 50%

Method of preparation
(1) Seedless dried fruits of Amalaki are cleaned and ground into
fine powder using a grinder or pulverizer.
(2) Powder is sieved through mesh 80 to remove coarse particles
and fibers.
(3) The powder should be kept in a dry airtight container to prevent
exposure to moisture.
(4) Potency of the properly preserved dried fruits lasts for one
year.

Dosage form: Fine, sour-tasting grayish to blackish powder.
Therapeutic properties4: Antacid, anti-ulcer, anti-emetic, antiinflammatory, antioxidant, immunomodulator, rejuvenator and a rich
source of vitamin C.
Dose and mode of administration
In adults, the dose of Amalaki powder is 3 to 6 grams and in children
500 mg to 1 gram, twice a day, to be swallowed on an empty stomach
or just before meals with water.
Indications and uses
(1) Hyperacidity, gastritis, anorexia, vomiting during pregnancy
and anaemia associated with chronic acid peptic disease are
the common indications for Amalaki powder.
(2) Clinical trials have proven Amalaki to be effective in the
management of acidic gastritis, non-ulcer dyspepsia and duodenal
ulcer with significant prevention of recurrence of symptoms.
(3)

Amalaki powder can also be used as a natural supplement of
vitamin C in nutritional deficiencies, pregnancy and chronic
diseases.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

4

Precautions and safety aspects
(1)

Amalaki powder is generally a safe medicine. No toxic or
adverse effects are reported even with continuous use. Assay
study for cellular toxicity of crude alcoholic extract of Amalaki
has proved it safe. Safety of Emblica officinalis is attributed
to its anti-mutagenic, anti-microbial, anti-inflammatory, anticarcinogenic, anti-oxidant, anti-tumour and immuno-modulatory
activities and numerous indications for its use in children and
pregnant women. It is also safe to the baby if the nursing
mother is taking this medication.

(2) Individuals sensitive to sour taste should add sugar to the
formulation or consume it in capsule form. Mixing it in warm
water or with sugar or honey makes ingestion of Amalaki
powder easy.
(3)

Amalaki has a cooling property and hence individuals intolerant
to cold should consume it with ginger powder and warm water
or honey. Even then if symptoms worsen, medication with
Amalaki powder may be stopped.

(4) It is advisable for patients of acidity and gastritis to avoid the
intake of spicy, hard, heavy, dry and raw foods, particularly
leafy vegetables and salad. Tendency of overeating and frequent
munching and use of alcoholic beverages should be avoided.

References
(1)

The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India. Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare, Department of Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy,
New Delhi, India, Reprinted Edition, 2001 Part I, Vol. I, p. 5-6.

(2)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB & Dennis TJ. Database on Medicinal Plants Used
in Ayurveda, Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Siddha, New
Delhi, 2001, Vol. 3, p. 14.

(3)

The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India. Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare, Department of Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy,
New Delhi, India, Reprinted Edition, 2001, Part I, Vol. I, p. 5.

(4)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB & Dennis TJ. Database on Medicinal Plants Used
in Ayurveda, Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Siddha, New
Delhi, 2001, Vol. 3, p. 12, 14.

Further reading
(1)

Kirtikar KR & Basu BD. Indian Medicinal Plants, reprinted edition. L.M.
Basu, Allahabad, India, Vol. III. 1988.

(2)

Kurup PNV, Ramdas VNK & Joshi P. Hand Book of Medicinal Plants
(revised and enlarged). Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and
Siddha, New Delhi. 1979.

5

(3)

Mathew SM, Rao SB, Nair GRS. Anti-ulcer activity of Amla extract.
Int. Seminar on Recent Trends in Pharm. Sci., Ootacamund, Abstr.
No. A 7. 1995.

(4)

Parvathavarthini S et al. Anti-ulcer activity of Emblica officinalis (Indian
gooseberry). Proc. Int. Cong. “Ayurveda 2000”, Chennai, Tamil Nadu,
India, 28-30 Jan. 2000.

(5)

Rastogi RP & Mehrotra BN. Compendium of Indian Medicinal Plants,
reprinted edition. Publications and Information Directorate, Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi, Vol. 1, 2 & 3. 1993.

(6)

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna Vijnana. Chaukhambha Bharati Academy,
Varanasi, Vol. II. 1981.

(7)

Sharma PV. Classical Uses of Medicinal Plants. Chaukhambha
Visvabharati, Varanasi, India. 1996.

(8)

Shastri AD. Bhaishajyaratnavali. Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthana,
Varanasi, India. 1981.

(9)

Varma MD et al. Amalaki rasayana in the treatment of chronic peptic
ulcer. J. Res. Indian Med. Yoga & Homeop., Vol. 12(4). 1977.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

7

2
Trikatu powder for common cold

Common cold or coryza is a common respiratory problem caused by
a variety of viral infections; commonest among them is the influenza
virus and its variants. Individuals show considerable variation in
susceptibility and environmental exposure is a contributory factor.
The word “cold” is a catch-all term that describes symptoms
such as sneezing, wet nose, running nose, scratchy throat, heaviness
in head, body ache, headache, indigestion, nausea, stomach ache,
vomiting, diarrhoea and fever.
Frequent attacks of cold are a reflection of a temporary dip in
immunity that is most often caused by insufficient rest; too many rich
foods, stress and exposure to cold and dampness can also precipitate
its occurrence. Frequent colds can make the individual vulnerable
to secondary lower respiratory tract infections. Early and consistent
attention, along with adequate time for convalescence, keeps all colds
from becoming problematic.
Trikatu is a simple herbal preparation with which common cold
can be managed successfully taking prescribed precautions:
(1) Patients suffering from common cold should prevent direct
exposure to cold wind, intake of heavy meals, drinking of cold
water, suppression of natural urges of stools, urine and flatus,
sleeping on the floor and during daytime.
(2) Light meals with spicy, sour and salty taste, curd, garlic, frequent
drinking of warm water, fresh radish, brinjal (eggplant), and hot
soup of green gram are helpful in common cold.
(3) Covering head with cap or any warm cloth, steam bath, head
massage, gargles with warm water and avoidance of anger
facilitate recovery from the common cold.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

8

Trikatu powder
Trikatu powder is a simple formulation made by mixing fine powders
of three commonly used herbal drugs in equal quantity namely dry
ginger (Shunthi), black pepper (Maricha) and long pepper (Pippali).
Trikatu, literally means ‘three pungents,’ because all the three
ingredients are predominantly of pungent taste. All the three are
spices used commonly in the kitchen and traded widely from India
since ancient times.
Composition
Trikatu powder consists of fine powder of three pungent drugs viz.
Shunthi, Maricha and Pippali in equal proportion. Shunthi is the
dried rhizome of ginger. Maricha is the dried fruit of black pepper
and Pippali is the dried fruit of long pepper.
Name

English
Name

Latin Name

Family

Part used

Shunthi

Dry ginger

Zingiber officinale
Rose.

Zingiberaceae

Rhizome

Maricha

Black pepper

Piper nigrum Linn.

Piperaceae

Fruit

Pippali

Long pepper

Piper longum Linn.

Piperaceae

Fruit

Dried rhizomes of
Shunthi.

Dried fruits of Maricha.

Dried fruits of Pippali.

Main chemical constituents of Shunthi1: Essential oil, pungent
constituents (gingerol and shogoal), resinous matter and starch.
Main chemical constituents of Maricha2: Alkaloids (piperine,
chavicine, piperidine and piplartine) and essential oil.
Main chemical constituents of Pippali3: Essential oil and alkaloids
(piperine, sesamin and piplartine).

9

Quality standards
Water
soluble
ash

Alcohol/
ethanol
soluble
extractive

Water
soluble
extractive

Foreign
matter

Ingredients

Total ash

Shunthi4

Not more
than 6%

Not more
than
1.7%

Not less than
4.5%

Not less
than
10%

Not more
than 2%

Maricha5

Not more
than 6%

Not more
than 1%
(acid
soluble ash)

-

-

Not more
than 2%

Pippali6

Not more
than 5%

Not more
than 6%
(acid
soluble ash)

Not less than
12%

Not less
than 11%

Not more
than 2%

Method of preparation
(1) Take 50 grams of each of the three ingredients, dry them further
to remove the moisture for easy powdering.
(2) Take an equal quantity of each drug of Trikatu and mix well
in a dry container.
(3) Grind the mixture in a grinder or pulverizer till fine powder is
obtained.
(4) Sieve the powder through 85 size mesh to remove the coarse
fibers and other particles if any.
(5)

Keep Trikatu powder in an air-tight dry container of glass or food
grade plastic; store in a dry cool place away from direct sunlight.
It is good to use the powder within one year.

Dosage form: Blackish-brown fine powder.
Therapeutic properties: Anti-inflammatory, analgesic, expectorant,
digestive, carminative.
Dose and mode of administration
Adult dose of Trikatu is 2 grams given three times a day preferably
with warm milk or water or honey. In children the dose may be
reduced according to the age and can be given in a dose of 125 mg
to 500 mg thrice a day. Another way is – add Trikatu powder to one
cup of milk, boil it for a few minutes and take it warm.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

10

Indications and uses

Trikatu is used in combination with honey to alleviate diseases
such as colds, rhinitis, cough, breathlessness, asthma, dyspepsia
and obesity7. It also improves the digestive power.
Precautions and safety aspects
(1) No side effect or toxic effect of Trikatu has been mentioned
in the classical literature. Clinical studies have also shown no
adverse effects in patients treated with recommended dose
of Trikatu powder alone as well as in combination with other
herbal preparations.
(2) Since Trikatu powder is hot in nature, large dose should be
avoided as the patient may complain of burning sensation,
burning micturition, etc. In such conditions, the use should be
stopped immediately and the patient should be advised to take
cooling agents and milk in plenty till the complaints subside
completely.
(3) Take simple diet with warm, light, soft and liquid foods. Avoid
cold drinks, cold juices, ice cream, spicy, oily and too dry
foodstuff. Stay in a warm and well ventilated room.
(4) Warm saline gargles, steam inhalation and fomentation help in
relieving cold symptoms.
(5) Medication with Trikatu is not advisable for pregnant women.
However, it is safe for the baby if a nursing mother is taking
this medication.

References
(1)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 104.

(2)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 117.

(3)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3 New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2001. p. 474.

(4)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 103.

(5)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 116.

11

(6)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. IV. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 91.

(7)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. 2nd revised English edition. Part I. New Delhi: Department
of Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2003. p. 110.

Further reading
(1)

Pandey GS, ed. Bhavamishra. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu.
Chaukhambha Bharati Academy, 1999.

Varanasi:

(2)

Dhanukar SA, Karandikar SM. Evaluation of anti-allergic activity of
piper longum. Indian Drugs. 21(9) 1984.

(3)

Sarin YK. Illustrated manual of herbal drugs used in Ayurveda. New
Delhi: Council of Scientific and Industrial Research & Indian Council
of Medical Research, 1996.

(4)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2001.

(5)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 5. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2002.

(6)

National Institute of Science Communication. The useful plants of India.
New Delhi: Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 2000.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

13

3
Daruharidra decoction for conjunctivitis

Inflammation of conjunctiva causing redness of the eye is conjunctivitis.
Conjunctiva is a thin, transparent mucous membrane covering the
under surface of the eye lids and it extends from the eye lids to cover
the anterior part of the eyeball up to the margin of the cornea.
Common symptoms of conjunctivitis are redness, itching,
stickiness, foreign body sensation, irritation, watering from the eyes
and sometimes intolerance to light. Vision is generally normal but a
slight blurring may occur if excess secretions form a film over the
cornea. Conjunctivitis may begin in one eye but often spreads to
involve both eyes.
Conjunctivitis is most commonly due to viral and sometimes
bacterial infections. But it can also result from allergic reactions
or from chemical irritants, air pollution, smoke, shampoos, dirt,
swimming pool chlorine or noxious fumes. Rarely, underlying chronic
inflammatory conditions can also cause a persistent conjunctivitis.
The infectious form of conjunctivitis is very common in children and
is highly contagious.
Traditionally, home remedies have been successfully used
for soothing inflamed eyes with uncomplicated symptoms, minor
infections, or allergies. Treatment consists primarily of cleansing
the eyes and preventing the condition from spreading. Daruharidra
decoction is a popular traditional formulation mentioned in Ayurvedic
texts for the management of uncomplicated conjunctivitis.

Daruharidra (Berberis aristata D.C.)
Daruharidra (Indian berberry) is a shrub or small tree, distributed
in the temperate and subtropical parts of Asia, Europe and America.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

14

Daruharidra has been in use (as eye drops/ointment) for centuries
for prophylactic as well as curative purposes in common eye ailments
like conjunctivitis. It is an important ingredient of many traditionally
used formulations meant for local ophthalmic use, commonly as
decoction and solidified water extract called Rasanjana. These drug
forms are used orally, locally as well as for topical ocular preparation.
Antimicrobial activity of B. aristata is well demonstrated against
a variety of bacteria, fungi, protozoas, helminths, chlamydia and
viruses. The alkaloid berberine is known to possess anti-microbial
properties against gram positive and gram negative bacteria.
Composition
The formulation consists of the decoction or solidified water extract
of the stem or root of Daruharidra (Berberis aristata D.C.) termed
as Rasanjana.
English name

Indian berberry

Latin name

Berberis aristata D.C.

Family

Berberidaceae

Part used

Stem and root.

Flowering shoot of Daruharidra.

Roots of Daruharidra.

Main chemical constituents1
Alkaloids like berberine, berbamine, aromoline, karachine, palmitine,
oxyacanthine and oxyberberine.

15

Quality standards2:
Foreign matter

Not more than 2%

Total ash

Not more than 14%

Acid-insoluble ash

Not more than 5%

Alcohol-soluble extractive

Not less than 6%

Water-soluble extractive

Not less than 8%

Method of preparation
(1) Soak overnight 5 grams of coarse powder of Daruharidra in
100 ml of water.
(2) Boil the mixture till half of the water remains and filter it.
(3) Use the filtrate at room temperature to irrigate the inflamed
eye(s).

Dosage form: Yellowish coloured liquid.

Therapeutic properties3
Anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, anti-diarrhoeal, anti-trachoma
activity, and antipyretic.
Indications and uses
Conjunctivitis, trachoma and eye infection resulting from Chlamydia
trachomatis, and chronic ophthalmic inflammation.
Dose and mode of administration
(1) Patient is made to lie down on the back with the neck slightly
extended. Daruharidra is poured on the eye as thin stream with
undine or with syringe without injection needle or canula. This
procedure can be repeated twice or thrice in a day depending
upon the severity of the symptoms.
(2)

Generally the eye should be kept closed but in case of eye discharge,
pulling the lids apart and irrigating the eye may be required.

(3)

In cases where redness and burning sensation in the eye are
prominent, irrigating fluid should be cold. When pain and discharge
are prominent, then lukewarm decoction should be used.

(4)

Daruharidra decoction can also be applied in the form of eye drops
in conjunctivitis. For this purpose keep 2 ml of the filtered decoction
mixed with equal quantity of pure honey in an eye dropper vial
and use this mixture within 12 hours by instilling 1 to 2 drops in
each affected eye 4 to 6 times a day at regular intervals.
Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

16

Precaution and safety aspects
(1) Decoction and eye drops solution must be prepared fresh daily
and kept in a sterile vessel.
(2) Infection can be easily transmitted by touching or rubbing your
eyes, make an effort to avoid it.
(3) Protect the eyes from dirt, sunlight, other irritating substances
and from repeated rubbing.
(4) Avoid the use of cosmetics while suffering from conjunctivitis.
(5) Remove contact lens, if it is worn.
(6) For cleansing and soothing the eyes dip a clean cloth in warm
water, wring it out and place it on the eye till it becomes cool.
Then apply another cloth in the same way.
(7) Avoid prolonged work under artificial light and excessive use
of the eyes.
(8) If eye symptoms aggravate or are not relieved within two-three
days, seek doctor’s advice for necessary treatment.
(9) Strictly avoid sharing clothes, handkerchiefs and towels and
wash such items separately.
(10) On coming in contact with a person suffering from conjunctivitis,
wash your hands with soap and water properly.

References
(1)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 1. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2000. p. 121.

(2)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. II. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 34.

(3)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 1. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2000. p. 120-123.

Further reading
(1)

The Wealth of India. Raw materials. New Delhi: Public Information
Department, Council of Scientific & Industrial Research, 1988.

(2)

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1982.

(3)

Sabnis Mukund. Chemistry and pharmacology of Ayurvedic medicinal
plants. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Surabharati Prakashana, 2006.

(4)

Singhal GD, Sharma KR. Ophthalmic and otorhinolaryngological
considerations in ancient Indian surgery. Allahabad: Singhal
Publications, 1976.

(5)

Acharya JT. ed. Sushruta samhita. Varanasi: Chaukhamba Orientalia,
1980.

17

4
Haritaki powder for constipation

Constipation is a common problem which usually refers to persistent,
difficult, infrequent, or seemingly incomplete defecation. Other
expressions of constipation include passage of unduly dry and hard
faeces, sluggish action of bowel, etc. It is important to note that it
is virtually impossible to define what constitutes a “normal bowel
movement” in terms of frequency. Generally, frequency of bowel
evacuation varies from person to person. As per a person’s tendency,
lifestyle and dietary habit, frequency of defecation of 1-2 per day to
thrice a week is considered as normal bowel habit for that individual,
unless it creates any discomfort or disturbs his routine life. The volume
of stool passed differs greatly in different races.
Unsatisfactory bowel evacuation is the chief condition for diagnosis
of constipation. Some other symptoms which accompany or result from
constipation are indigestion, flatulence, abdominal pain or discomfort,
headache and sleeplessness. The retention of hard faecal masses
may give rise to spurious diarrhoea and in extreme situations can
lead to intestinal obstruction especially in frail and bed-ridden older
individuals.
Various causative factors for constipation are given below.
(1) Irritable bowel syndrome
(2) Related to diet factors:
•

Too bland food, e.g. with low fibre residue

•

Too dry and astringent food

•

Inadequate fluid intake

(3) Intake of hard water
(4) Metabolic disease like hypothyroidism

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

18

(5) Obstructive diseases of lower gastrointestinal tract
(6) Drugs: opium, iron, blood pressure medicines
(7) Irregular bowel habit
(8) Sedentary lifestyle
(9) Depressive disorders
(10) Old age
(11) Suppression of natural urge of defecation

In Ayurveda, various laxative drugs are mentioned to treat such
conditions. Out of these Haritaki powder is a simple herbal laxative
which is frequently used for treating constipation following certain
lifestyle changes. Some do’s and don’ts given in the Ayurvedic texts
are helpful in preventing constipation:
(1) Persons suffering from constipation should not ignore defecation
urge nor should they strain for a long time to pass out
stools.
(2) Drinking of warm water and milk improves intestinal movements
and is beneficial in relieving constipation.
(3) Much deviation from the normal timing of meals and quantity of
food should be avoided. It is beneficial to take soft, digestible
and semi-solid food.
(4) Heavy and untimely meals, eating food before the digestion of
earlier food, and intake of dry, astringent and cold foods hamper
intestinal movements adding to constipation.
(5) Regular walking, physical activity and deep breathing and certain
edibles like, ginger, lemon, resins, dates, figs and almond oil
help in alleviating constipation.

Haritaki (Terminalia chebula Retz.)
Haritaki powder is a simple formulation made of its dried ripe fruits.
The plant is also named as Pathya, owing to its beneficial effect for
the channels (patha) of the body. It is not only used for constipation
but for various gastrointestinal and systemic problems. Scientific
studies have established2,7 its stomachic, laxative and anti-flatulence
actions1. Judicious use of Haritaki with necessary dietary and lifestyle
changes can treat constipation successfully as well as improve the
physiological status of the gut.

19

Composition
Haritaki powder is fine powder of dried ripe fruits of Terminalia
chebula.
English name

Chebulic myrobalan, Ink nut

Latin name

Terminalia chebula Retz.

Family

Combretaceae

Part used

Dried fruits without seeds

A fruit-bearing branch of Haritaki tree.

Dried fruits of Haritaki.

Main chemical constituents2
Anthraquinone, glycoside, chebulinic acid, chebulagic acid.
Quality standards3
Identity, purity and potency of Haritaki fruits for its oral use is
estimated on the basis of the following physical constants:
Foreign matter

Not more than 1%

Total ash

Not more than 5%

Acid insoluble ash

Not more than 5%

Alcohol soluble extractive

Not less than 40%

Water soluble extractive

Not less than 60%

Method of preparation
(1) Take dried fruits of Haritaki, remove their seeds and dry them
further in the shade avoiding direct sunlight. Fruits should not
have been harvested more than six months ago.
(2) Make fine powder in a grinder or pulverizer.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

20

(3) Sieve the powder through 85 size mesh to remove coarse fibers
and other particles.
(4) Keep the powder in a dry and air tight plastic or glass container
and consume it within six months or before the next rainy
season, whichever is earlier.

Dosage form
Brownish fine powder.
Therapeutic Properties4
Haritaki has laxative, carminative, digestive, antispasmodic,
anthelmintic, anti-microbial, anti-stress and endurance promoting
properties.
Dose and mode of administration
To achieve laxative action of Haritaki, adult dose of powder is 3 to
6 grams and for children, the dose of Haritaki is 500 mg to 1 gram,
to be taken with lukewarm water once a day on an empty stomach.
It is preferably taken early in the morning or minimum three hours
after dinner.
Indication and uses
Haritaki is useful in constipation, haemorrhoids, stomatitis, hyperacidity
and associated gastrointestinal disorders.
Precautions and safety aspects
(1) No side or toxic effect of Haritaki is reported in classics with
its recommended dose. Clinical studies have also shown no
adverse effect in patients treated with Haritaki alone or with
formulations.
(2) It should not be prescribed to pregnant women. It is safe for
the baby if the nursing mother is taking this medication.
(3) The astringent and dry property of Haritaki may induce nausea
in sensitive individuals. This may be masked by consuming it
in tablet form or by preparing its decoction and adding jaggery
to it.
(4) Dose of Haritaki as a laxative varies from person to person
according to their constitution, digestive power and bowel habit.
Administration of Haritaki should be stopped if the desired effect
is not achieved.

21

(5) Sudden altered bowel habit, alternate diarrhoea and constipation
or persistence of the constipation in spite of proper administration
of Haritaki, are the signs of some serious pathological conditions
inside the gut. Therefore, the underlying cause must be properly
investigated and treatment should be taken under medical
supervision only.
(6) Too dry a diet should be avoided and a diet with higher fibre
content and liquids is advisable for the patient. Regular and
proper lifestyle plays an important role in keeping the gut
healthy.

References
(1)

Billore KV, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ, Chaudhari BG. Database on medicinal
plants used in Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research
in Ayurveda and Siddha, 2005. p. 283.

(2)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 47.

(3)

Billore KV, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ, Chaudhari BG. Database on medicinal
plants used in Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research
in Ayurveda and Siddha, 2005. p. 284.

(4)

Billore KV, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ, Chaudhari BG. Database on medicinal
plants used in Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi, Central Council for Research
in Ayurveda and Siddha, 2005. p. 283-284.

Further reading
(1)

Chatterjee A, Pakrashi SC. The treatise on Indian medicinal plants.
Vol. 5. New Delhi: National Institute of Science Communication,
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 1997.

(2)

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1999.

(3)

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna vijnana. Vol. II. Varanasi:
Sanskrit Sansthana, 1981.

(4)

Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plants. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Visvabharati Academy, 1996.

(5)

Shastri AD. Bhaishajyaratnavali. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit
Santhana, 1981.

(6)

Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, National Institute of
Science Communication and Information Resources. The useful plants
of India. New Delhi: National Institute of Science Communication,
2000.

Chaukhambha

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

23

5
Pippali powder for cough

Cough is a reflex phenomenon characterized by a sudden, violent
expulsion of air from the mouth, with or without sputum, after
deep inspiration and closure of the glottis. This is the most frequent
respiratory symptom. Coughing is an important way to keep the throat
and airways clear. However, involuntary excessive coughing means
there is an underlying cause that compels the person to cough.
The cough may be dry or productive. In dry cough there is only
explosive sound with no or little material coming out from the airways.
Whereas a productive cough is one that brings up phlegm or sputum,
at times mixed with pus or blood or both. Cough can be either acute
or chronic. Acute cough usually appears suddenly, goes away within
2-3 weeks and is often due to common cold, flu, or sinus infection.
Chronic cough lasts longer than 2 to 3 weeks and is a symptom
mostly of respiratory tract disease.
Besides respiratory infections namely tuberculosis, other common
causes of cough include chronic tobacco smoking, naso-bronchial
allergy, bronchial asthma, chronic bronchitis with or without airway
obstruction, lung abscess, bronchiectasis and bronchogenic tumours,
reflux disease of gastrointestinal system, air pollution, heart failure,
valvular heart disease and certain medicines used for the treatment of
high blood pressure. The diagnosis of the cause of cough is essential
before definitive therapy is initiated.
Painful cough in association with fever indicates respiratory tract
infection. Intermittent, ineffectual and exhausting cough occurs in
chronic bronchitis and bronchial asthma and it is generally worst at
night or on waking. Cough may be loose and readily productive of
sputum in bronchiectasis and early stages of bronchial cancer. Sputum

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

24

production may be a relatively late development in lung tuberculosis.
Loud and harsh cough without explosive character called stridor is
found in whooping cough and in the presence of laryngeal or tracheal
obstruction. Cough usually aggravates with change in temperature or
weather. The explosive character of normal cough is lost in laryngeal
paralysis. A short troublesome cough of old people due to chronic
bronchitis recurs every winter and it is called winter cough. Cough
due to smoking is usually dry and irritating. Clinical and radiological
evaluation is usually diagnostic in a large majority of cases. While
definitive therapy may wait diagnosis, symptomatic treatment usually
provides relief.
Ayurveda considers Kasa (cough) as a disease for which a specific
line of treatment and various remedies are prescribed. Simple herbal
remedies such as Pippali can successfully treat uncomplicated cough,
if patients observe the prescribed precautions along with medication.
These are:
(1) Exposure to fumes and dust, sudden change of temperature in
the surrounding, dry and spicy foods, chilled water and food,
leafy vegetables and heavy meals should be avoided.
(2) Soft, hot and easily digestible meals, edibles like honey, small
cardamom, fresh ginger, radish, meat soup, goat milk and resins
help to control cough.
(3) It is advisable to resort to sleeping during the day and not
to suppress urges of stools, urination and belching. Cough
symptom can be controlled easily with frequent drinks of warm
water, mental relaxation and with less talking.

Pippali (Piper longum Linn.)
Pippali powder is a single-ingredient herbal formulation made from
the fruits of long pepper, an aromatic climber with perennial woody
roots. The fruits are harvested around January while still green and
unripe, as they are most pungent at this stage and of high medicinal
value. Harvested fruits are dried in the sun till they turn grey or
blackish. Use of Pippali as a multipurpose drug is first documented
in Charaka Samhita, where it is listed among Rasayana (rejuvenative
and immuno-enhancer) drugs and largely mentioned for the treatment
of cough, respiratory distress, gastro-intestinal disorders, pulmonary
tuberculosis etc. Besides codified knowledge about its uses, Pippali
is largely used as a home remedy and in folk medicine. Long pepper

25

is a commonly used spice in India and other Asian countries and
its medicinal usage is quite popular, particularly for the treatment
of common ailments of childhood. Regarded as a drug of choice for
cough of different origins, Pippali powder is widely used by Ayurvedic
practitioners in India not only for symptomatic control but also for
the treatment of root causes of cough affecting the naso-respiratory,
digestive and blood systems. This popular plant medicine is even
indicated for naso-respiratory allergy and tuberculosis of lungs and
for immunodeficiency conditions. Pippali is described in the Ayurvedic
Pharmacopoeia1 and in formulations in Ayurvedic Formulary of
India2. Being simple, the formulation can be easily prepared at home
for personal use. Scientific studies have proven its bio-availability
enhancing, liver protective and immuno-stimulatory actions3.
Composition
Pippali powder is made from dried fruits of Piper longum.
English name

Long pepper

Latin name

Piper longum Linn.

Family

Piperaceae

Part used

Fruits

A twig with unripe fruits of Pippali.

Dried fruits of Pippali.

Main chemical constituents4
Essential oil and alkaloids – piperine, sesamin and piplartine.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

26

Quality standards1
As per the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, quality standards
determining the identity, purity and strength of long pepper fruits
are based on the following aspects:
Foreign matter

Not more than 2%

Total ash

Not more than 7%

Acid insoluble ash

Not more than 0.5%

Acid-soluble extractive

Not less than 5%

Water-soluble extractive

Not less than 7%

Pepper powder under the microscope shows deep, moss-green
colour, fragments of parenchyma, oval or elongated stone cells, oil
globules and starch grains.
Method of preparation
(1) Dried long pepper fruits are cleaned and powdered in a grinder
or mortar.
(2) Powder is sieved through mesh of 85 size and kept in an airtight plastic or glass container.
(3) Exposure to moisture should be avoided. It is advisable to
prepare at least 50 grams of powder at a time.

Dosage form
Blackish green powder with aromatic odour and pungent taste.
Therapeutic properties5
Pippali powder has anti-inflammatory, anti-phlegmatic, decongestant,
anti-spasmodic, expectorant, anti-allergic, appetizer, anthelmintic,
immunostimulatory and tonic properties.
Dose and mode of administration
The adult dose of the formulation is 1 gram to 3 grams and the
children’s dose is 125 mg to 250 mg, two or three times a day, mixed
with honey or warm water. Honey is the best vehicle for consuming
Pippali powder. Jaggery or liquorice root powder may be used in
place of honey, if the cough is dry, irritating and persistent. Warm
water should be taken after consuming the medicine to facilitate its
swallowing and fast absorption.

27

Indications and uses
(1)

Pippali powder is indicated for acute and chronic cough due to
common cold, pharyngitis, laryngitis, bronchitis, naso-respiratory
catarrh, respiratory allergy, asthma and smoking.

(2) Non-specific cough is adequately manageable with Pippali
Churna.
(3) The formulation is also effective in controlling symptoms
associated with cough-like sneezing, hiccough, nasal discharge,
fever, poor appetite, indigestion, etc.

Precautions and safety aspects
(1)

Pippali is regarded as safe in recommended doses. Ayurvedic
literature does not specifically mention any toxicity or adverse
effects from the use of Sitopaladi powder like formulations,
which include Pippali. However, long-term use of Pippali alone
is not recommended in Charaka Samhita. Scientific studies
have shown 750-800 mg/kg dose as LD-50 value of piperine
in mice.

(2) Do not consume Pippali powder without mixing properly with
honey or warm water.
(3) Fried and spicy foods, chilled drinks, curd, yogurt, smoking
and exposure to cold should be avoided while suffering with
cough. Frequent sipping of warm water helps a lot to facilitate
the effect of the medicine in controlling cough whether dry or
productive.
(4) Patients with cough lasting over 10-15 days should take proper
medical advice for exact diagnosis of underlying cause and for
needful treatment.
(5) Patients with diabetes mellitus and obesity should use the
formulation without honey or jaggery. Similarly, sugar and
jaggery should not be taken with Pippali for long-term use
in overweight and obese individuals suffering from chronic
cough.
(6) The formulation could alleviate cough resulting from lung
tuberculosis and tumour or cancer of respiratory tract, but it
is not the remedy for these underlying conditions.
(7) If the sputum is mixed with blood or frank blood is coughed
out, do not attempt to treat cough with Pippali powder.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

28

(8) Stop medication with Pippali powder, if symptoms aggravate
and dryness of mouth, excessive thirst and burning sensation
in the body and urine appear.
(9) Owing to the hot and lubricating nature of Pippali, its excessive
and long-term use is contraindicated in Ayurvedic literature.
Ignorance about this fact may lead to untoward symptoms.
(10) Individuals with heat-dominating temperament and body
constitution and menstruating and pregnant women should
be careful in observing any unwanted effects while consuming
Pippali powder. In case of adverse effects medical advice should
be sought promptly.
(11) Proper medical advice should be taken, if cough accompanies
difficulty in breathing, swelling of face or feet, high grade
fever, expectoration with foul-smelling yellowish-green phlegm,
blood in sputum, difficulty in lying down, night sweating and
unintentional weight loss.
(12) Pippali powder has a potent antifertility activity; therefore, it
must be used with caution in the first trimester of pregnancy.
Women planning for pregnancy should avoid use of Pippali
powder. However, the baby is not harmed if a lactating mother
is taking this medication.

References
(1)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. IV. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2004 p. 91-92.

(2)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Part II. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
& Homeopathy, 2000. p. 49-56.

(3)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, New Delhi, 2001. p. 475.

(4)

Sharma PC. Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2001. p. 474.

(5)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2001. p. 473, 475.

29

Further reading
(1)

Annamalai AR, Manavalan R. Effects of trikatu and its individuals
components and piperine on gastrointestinal tract, trikatu. Indian
Drugs. 27, 1990.

(2)

Dhanukar SA & Karandikar SM. Evaluation of anti-allergic activity of
piper longum. Indian Drugs. 1984; 21: 377-83.

(3)

Dhanukar SA, Karandikar SM, Desai M. Efficacy of piper longum in
childhood asthma. Indian Drugs. 21, 1984.

(4)

Warrier PK et al. Eds. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. IV. Madras: Orient
Longman Ltd., 1997.

(5)

Kirtikar KR & Basu BD. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. III. Allahabad:
LM Basu, 1988.

(6)

Kurup PNV, Ramadas VNK, Joshi P. Handbook of medicinal plants. New
Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1979.

(7)

Pharmacological investigations of certain medicinal plants and
compound formulations used in Ayurveda and Siddha. New Delhi:
Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1996.

(8)

Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plants. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Visvabharati, 1996.

(9)

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna vijnana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 2001.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

31

6
Kutaja powder for diarrhoea

Diarrhoea is defined as the passage of abnormally liquid or unformed
stools at an increased frequency, and denotes a change in the usual
bowel movement. It is a symptom of various disease conditions of
the gastrointestinal system and is often considered as a disease itself.
Diarrhoea can be acute and chronic as per its causes.
Acute diarrhoea lasts for hours or days and the number of bowel
movements usually exceeds three per day. The causes of acute
diarrhoea can be infectious or non-infectious. The usual clinical
features of acute infective diarrhoea are frequent stools, sometimes
with blood and mucous, pain during passing stools, abdominal pain,
vomiting and fever. Severe diarrhoea leads to dehydration, which
manifests itself as apprehension, cold clammy skin, rapid pulse, deep
and rapid respiration, inelastic skin, sunken eyeballs, dry tongue,
scanty urine and low blood pressure. Untreated acute diarrhoea can
be fatal. The non-infectious category of diarrhoea can be caused
by drugs such as antibiotics, certain antidepressants, antacids,
bronchodilators, chemotherapeutic agents, laxatives, non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, etc., and spurious diarrhoea, which follows
chronic constipation especially in older people and in association with
psychological stress.
Chronic diarrhoea lasts for weeks or months and may be either
persistent or recurrent. The aetiology of chronic diarrhoea is usually
related to structural and functional disorders of the gastrointestinal
tract. The clinical features of chronic diarrhoea are either persistent
or recurrent with intervening periods of normalcy or constipation.
Stool volume may be large or small and may be watery, loose,
bulky or frothy. Diarrhoea may be accompanied by abdominal pain

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

32

or discomfort and abdominal distension. Systemic symptoms such
as fever, anorexia, weight loss, generalized weakness and malaise
may also be present. Untreated chronic diarrhoea can lead to malabsorption syndrome and malnutrition.
It is always important to understand the underlying cause of
diarrhoea so that the right treatment can be planned. However,
uncomplicated diarrhoea due to indigestion and infection can be
managed with Ayurvedic formulation such as Kutaja powder along
with necessary dietary precautions.

Kutaja [Holarrhena antidysenterica (Roxb. ex Flem.)
Wall.]
Kutaja powder is a simple formulation prepared from the stem
bark of Holarrhena antidysenterica (Roxb. ex Flem.) Wall., a small
to medium-sized tree, found throughout India. The stem bark is
collected from 8-12 years old trees during the middle of rainy season
(July to September) and again at the end of winter by hewing
and peeling and separating it from the attached wood. The stem
bark is bitter in taste and used in Ayurveda for the treatment of
gastrointestinal disorders, particularly diarrhoea and dysentery. Most
of the Ayurvedic formulations described in literature and various
commercially marketed formulations for diarrhoea essentially contain
Kutaja as one of their ingredients. Kutaja is mentioned in the Indian
Ayurvedic Pharmacopeias1 as well as Formulary2. Apart from the
preferred use of Kutaja in the treatment of diarrhoea, scientific
studies have established its anti-protozoal, anti-giardia and antiamoebic properties.3
Composition
Kutaja powder is prepared from the stem bark of Kutaja.
English name

Kurchi, Tellicherry bark

Latin name

Holarrhena antidysenterica Roxb. ex Flem.
Wall.

Family

Apocynaceae

Parts used

Stem bark

33

Leafy shoots with flowers of Kutaja.

Dried stem bark of Kutaja.

Main chemical constituents4
Conessine, conessemine, kurchine, kurchicine, etc.
Quality standards5
Identity, purity and potency of Kutaja Churna for its oral use are
estimated on the basis of the following physical constants:
Foreign matter

Not more than 2%

Total ash

Not more than 7%

Acid insoluble ash

Not more than 1%

Alcohol (60%) soluble
extractive

Not less than 18%

Water soluble extractive

Not less than 10%

Method of preparation
(1) Take 50 grams of dried stem bark of Kutaja and further dry it
in the shade to remove moisture for easy powdering.
(2) Grind stem bark in a grinder or pulverizer till fine powder is
obtained.
(3) Filter the powder through 85 mesh to remove coarse particles
and fibers.
(4) The shelf life of the powder is four months but it can retain its
potency for at least six months, if kept in an air tight container
and protected from direct sunlight and heat.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

34

Dosage form
Bitter brownish powder.
Therapeutic properties6
The bark of Kutaja has anti-diarrhoeal, constipating, astringent, antidysenteric, anthelmintic, carminative and digestive properties.
Dose and mode of administration
The adult dose of Kutaja powder is 3-5 g and for children 500 mg
to 1 g, twice or thrice daily with warm water, before meals.
Indication and uses
Kutaja bark is useful in various kinds of diarrhoea and dysentery.
Precautions and safety aspects
(1) No side effect or toxic effect of Kutaja powder has been
mentioned in the classical Ayurvedic literature. Clinical studies
have also shown no adverse effects in patients treated with
Kutaja powder within the recommended dose alone as well as
in combination with other home remedies. Kutaja may cause
distension of the abdomen after using for a few days.
(2) As prolonged use of Kutaja powder may produce constipation,
hence as soon as the diarrhoea is checked the dose of Kutaja
powder should be tapered off.
(3) A study on the side effects of Holarrhena antidysenterica in
patients has revealed that it can lead to subjective symptoms
as well as hypertension7. Hence hypertensive patients should
take Kutaja powder under medical supervision.
(4) Prolonged use of Kutaja powder during pregnancy should be
done under medical supervision. However, it is safe for the baby
if a nursing mother is taking this medication.

References
(1)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I, Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, MoHFW, 2001. p. 78-79.

(2)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Part-II. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
& Homeopathy, MoHFW, 2000. p. 66.

35

(3)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB,& Dennis TJ. Data base on medicinal plants
used in Ayurveda. Vol. II. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda & Siddha, 2002. p. 349.

(4)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopeia of India. Part I, Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, MoHFW, 2001. p. 79.

(5)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopeia of India. Part I, Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, MoHFW, 2001. p. 78.

(6)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Data base on medicinal plants
used in Ayurveda. Vol. II. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda & Siddha, 2001. p. 348.

(7)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB & Dennis TJ. Data base on medicinal plants
used in Ayurveda. Vol. II. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda & Siddha, 2001. p. 350.

Further reading
(1)

Bhattacharjee SK. Handbook of medicinal plants. Jaipur: Pointer
Publishers, 1998.

(2)

Chopra RN, Chopra IC, Varma BS. Supplement to glossary of Indian
medicinal plants. New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate,
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 1992.

(3)

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1982.

(4)

Dinesh Chandra, Dixit SK, Sen PC, Joshi D. An experimental study of
Kutajarishta with special reference to amoebiasis. Ancient Sci. Life.
1988; 8(2).

(5)

Warrier PK et al. Eds. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. III. Madras: Orient
Longman Ltd., 1966.

(6)

Janot MM, Cavier R. Anthelmintic properties of conessine hydrochloride.
Ann. Pharm. Franc. 1949; 7: 549-552; Chem. Abstr., 44(5), 1950.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

37

7
Lashuna oil for earache

Pain in the ear is a very uncomfortable symptom, which may be due
to the local causes in the ear or may relate to external causes. The
earache may increase on lying down due to increased blood supply
to the ear in recumbent position. The general causes of earache are
as follows:
(1) Exposure to extreme cold weather.
(2) Exposure to pressure changes during diving or swimming and
air travel.
(3) Picking or probing the ear canal.
(4) Improper instrumentation during the examination or treatment
of ear.
(5) Exposure to very high-pitched sounds.
(6) Injury to the head especially the temporal bone.
(7) Entry of water into auditory canal during bathing.
(8) Local bacterial or fungal infection such as furuncles and
otomycosis.
(9) Impacted wax.
(10) Referred pain due to carious tooth, impacted molar, ulcerative
lesions in the oral cavity and tongue, osteoarthritis of temporomandibular joint, tonsillitis, etc.

The earache can also be functional, which needs to be carefully
observed. Management of earache requires proper evaluation
and treatment before complications develop. Ayurveda prescribes
instillation of medicated oil and juice of certain medicinal plants in

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

38

the affected ear. One of the simple formulations for earache used in
traditional medicine is mustard oil prepared with garlic.

Lashuna (Allium sativum Linn.)
Lashuna oil comprises of cloves of garlic heated in mustard oil. Both
Lashuna and mustard oil are commonly used drugs almost in every
Indian kitchen and are well known for their medicinal properties in
the traditional medicine of the Asian region. Lashuna comprises of
bulbs of Allium sativum Linn., a perennial bulbous plant, cultivated
as an important condiment crop in India. It is mainly used for facial
paralysis, lock-jaw, flatulence, colic, arthralgia and dental caries. The
oil of Lashuna is used for skin rashes and as an ear drop1. Sarshapa
consists of dried seeds of Brassica campestris Linn., an erect, stout,
simple or branched, glaucous, annual herb, 50 to 60 cm tall, commonly
cultivated in Bengal, Bihar and Punjab, also found occasionally in
wastelands and fields. The oil of Sarshapa is also used in the form
of gargle and is also applied with rock salt for dental caries.2 In
addition, it is also used for massage for increasing muscular strength
and enhancing the colour and complexion of skin.
Composition
Lashuna oil comprises of Lashuna and mustard oil.
Name

English
Name

Latin Name

Family

Part Used

Lashuna

Garlic

Allium sativum
Linn.

Liliaceae

Bulb

Sarshapa

Mustard

Brassica
compestris
Linn.

Brassicaceae

Seed (Oil)

Cultivated plants of garlic.

Garlic bulbs.

39

Main chemical constituents
(1) Lashuna3: Volatile oil containing allyl disulphide, diallyl disulphide
and also allin, allicin, mucilage and albumin.
(2) Sarshapa oil2: Fixed oil and the glycerides of palmitic, stearic,
oleic, linoleic, linolenic, eicosenoic, etc.

Quality standards
Identity, purity and potency of Lashuna and Sarshapa are estimated
on the basis of the following physical constants.
Foreign
matter

Total
ash

Acid
insoluble
ash

Alcohol
soluble
extractives

Water
soluble
extractives

Volatile
oil/Fixed
oil

Lashuna3

Not more
than 2%

Not more
than 4%

Not more
than 1%

Not less
than 2.5%

_

Not less
than 0.1%

Sarshapa4

Not more
than 2%

Not more
than 5%

Not more
than 0.5%

Not less
than 8%

Ingredient

Not less
than 16%

Not less
than 35%

Preparation of mustard oil with garlic
(1) Take about 20 ml (4 teaspoonsful) of mustard oil in a vessel
and add 5-6 pieces of peeled and slightly crushed fresh garlic
cloves.
(2) Put the mixture on a slow fire for about 5 -10 minutes till garlic
becomes brown and stop further heating.
(3) Filter the mixture through cotton cloth to obtain clear oil and
keep it in a clean glass bottle.

Dosage form
Lukewarm, pungent, yellowish-brown oil.
Dose and mode of administration
(1) Instill medicated oil in the affected ear drop by drop by tilting
the head to opposite side and retain it for about 30 minutes
by plugging the ear with cotton swab.
(2) Repeat the process for other ear if affected.
(3) Instillation of oil in the ears can be done twice daily for 2-3
days.

Therapeutic properties
Fresh garlic is anti-inflammatory, anti-fungal, anti-bacterial1, 5 antiviral, and anthelmintic.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

40

Indication and use
Earache.
Precaution and safety aspects
(1) Local application of Lashuna oil is traditionally considered to
be safe, but application on inflammatory lesions may produce
burning sensation or slight irritation.
(2) While using the oil, it should neither be too hot nor too cold.
(3) The oil instillation should be avoided if there is ear discharge.
(4) If there is no relief within three days, seek medical advice.

References
(1)

Billore KV et al. Data base on medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. Vol.
VI. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Siddha,
2004. p. 158.

(2)

Lavekar GS et al. Data base on medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. Vol.
VIII. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Siddha,
2007. p. 313.

(3)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 109.

(4)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India, Part I, Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 193.

(5)

Lavekar GS et al. Data base on medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. Vol.
VIII. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Siddha,
2007. p. 314.

Further reading
(1)

Ahsan M, Islam SN. Garlic: a broad spectrum antibacterial agent
effective against common pathogenic bacteria. Fitoterapia. 67(4),
1996.

(2)

Chopra RN, Nayar SL, Chopra LC. Glossary of Indian medicinal plants.
New Delhi: Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 2002.

(3)

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1982.

(4)

Warrier PK et al. Eds. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. I. Madras: Orient
Longman Ltd., 1994.

(5)

Nadkarni AK. K.M. Nadkarni’s Indian materia medica. Vol. 1. Bombay:
Popular Prakashana, 1976.

(6)

Nagatsu A, Sugitani T, Mori Y, Okuyama H, Sakakibara J, Mizukami H.
Antioxidants from grape (Brassica campestris viv. Japonica hara) oil
cake. Nat. Prod. Res. 18(3), 2004.

41

(7)

Rastogi RP, Mehrotra BN. Compendium of Indian medicinal plants
(1960-1969). Vol. 1. Lucknow: Central Drug Research Institute, and
New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate, Council of Science
and Industrial Research, 1993.

(8)

Rastogi RP, Mehrotra BN. Compendium of Indian medicinal plants
(1970-1979). Vol. II. Lucknow: Central Drug Research Institute and
New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate, Council for Science
and Industrial Research, 1993.

(9)

Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plantsi: chaukhamba
vishvabharati. Varanasi: Orient Publishers and Distributors, 1996.

(10) Sharma PV. Dravyaguna-vijnana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhamba
Sanskrit Bharati Academy, 1978.
(11) India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Part II. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
& Homeopathy, 2000.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

43

8
Shirisha powder for eczema

Eczema is a term that denotes different types of allergic skin
inflammation usually of chronic origin. The symptoms of eczema
commonly include itching, reddened and dry skin. Since the skin is
itchy, prolonged scratching leads to a leathery thickening of the skin.
Cracking and weeping of the skin may also occur and open sores
may become infected.

Causes of eczema
Though the causes of eczema have not been fully determined, the
following list provides some insight as to the triggers for eczema:
(1) Family history: there is a genetic component to this disease.
(2) Irritants: exposure to industrial solvents, chemicals, vehicle
lubricants, soaps, cement, detergents, cleaning products, rubber
gloves and even cosmetic lotions and creams, etc.
(3) Allergy: strong reactions to some allergens can cause violent
skin eruptions.
(4) Chronic dry skin: dry skin that is left un-moisturized can develop
into eczema especially in cold weather.
(5) Poor circulation: more common in the elderly and affecting
lower limbs.
(6) Obsessive compulsive disorder: habitually rubbing or scratching
skin.
(7) Reaction to an infection: some fungal, parasitic, bacterial and
viral infections can cause localized eczema.
(8) Stress: stress causes the immune system to be compromised
causing increased susceptibility to skin conditions.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

44

(9) Diet: some have found modification to diet extremely useful in
maintaining remission periods.
(10) Unknown factors: some forms of eczema are triggered by
unknown reactions of the immune system.

Though eczema is very difficult to control, allergic component of
eczema can be controlled to an extent by regular internal and external
use of Shirisha, which is widely mentioned in Ayurvedic classics and
used in clinical practice at large by traditional practitioners. Some
do’s and don’ts include:
(1) Excessive intake of sour, salty and pungent foods and drinks,
curd, milk, jaggery, sesame seeds, black gram and alcoholic
beverages should be avoided.
(2) If there is oozing from the eczema site, efforts should be made
to keep the site clean and dry. Whereas in dry eczema it is
always advisable to keep the affected area moist and smooth
with vaseline or an oily preparation.
(3)

Avoidance of aggravating factors of eczema, and eating simple,
soft, easily digestible food helps. Edible items of bitter taste;
regular use of honey and peace of mind help in management
of eczema.

Shirisha (Albizzia lebbeck Benth.)
Shirisha consists of the powder of the bark of Albizzia lebbeck, a large,
deciduous tree, which is found all over India up to 900 meters in the
Himalayas. It grows wild especially in the moist and dry deciduous
forests. The bark of the tree is thick and dark or brownish grey with
numerous short irregular cracks. The seeds are oval or oblong, pale
brown, smooth with a hard testa. Shirisha is described as one of the
best Vishaghna (anti-toxin) drugs in Ayurvedic texts1. Clinical studies
show that Shirisha acts as an antidote to animal poisons which are
histaminic in nature and are also responsible for the production of
allergic dermatitis, urticaria and anaphylactic shock2.
Composition

Shirisha powder is prepared from its bark for oral use and decoction for
washing the affected skin.

45

English name

Siris tree, East Indian walnut, Kokko

Latin name

Albizzia lebbeck Benth.

Family

Fabaceae

Plant part used

Stem bark

Leafy branches of a
Shirisha tree.

Dried stem bark of Shirisha.

Main chemical constituents2
Condensed tannins and d-catechin, lebbecacidin, isomers of
leucocyanidin, friedelin-3-one.
Quality standards3
The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia of India provides quality standards of
Shirisha which are based on the following physical constants:
Foreign matter

Not more than 1%

Total ash

Not more than 8%

Acid insoluble ash

Not more than 1%

Acid-soluble extractive

Not less than 12%

Water-soluble extractive

Not less than 6%

Method of preparation
(1) The powder of the bark is prepared by grinding dried bark in
a grinder or pulverizer and then filtering it through mesh size
85.
(2) The powder should be kept in a dry container and stored in
a moisture-free area. Properly kept powder holds its potency
for 4-6 months.
(3) For making decoction, coarse powder is used.
(4) It is good to use the powder within four months of its
preparation.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

46

Dose and mode of administration
(1)

Shirisha bark powder is given orally to adults in a dose of 3
to 6 g and to children in a dose of 1 to 2 g twice daily after
meals with lukewarm water.

(2) The decoction is prepared by adding 16 times water to 10 g
coarse powder of bark of Shirisha and then boiling on slow
fire till about one fourth of water remains. The dose of the
freshly prepared decoction is 40 ml twice a day after meals.
For better relief add 5 g of turmeric powder in the decoction
of Shirisha just before taking it. To mask the taste sugar may
be added to the decoction. Fresh decoction is to be prepared
for every dose.
(3) The lesions may be washed with the decoction prepared from
the bark of Shirisha.
(4) The treatment may be continued for 3 to 4 weeks or till cure
is achieved, if relief of the symptoms is sustained.
(5) If the condition gets worse, seek doctor’s advice and check for
allergic reactions.

Dosage form
Grayish-brown powder or warm dark brown liquid having bitter
taste.
Therapeutic properties2
Shirisha bark is anti-protozoal, anti-histaminic, anti-allergic, antifungal, analgesic, anti-anaphylactic, anti-bacterial, central nervous
system depressant and bronchodilator.
Indications and uses
The bark is useful in allergic and chronic skin diseases including
various kinds of eczema.
Precaution and safety aspects
(1) Clinical and experimental studies have indicated the absence of
any serious toxicity if normal dose of Shirisha is used.
(2) Its safety in pregnancy is not proven. Therefore, it must be
used cautiously. However, it is safe for the baby if a nursing
mother is taking this medication.
(3) As it has mild spermicidal activity, its use in oligospermic persons
should be avoided.

47

(4) The following measures can help to prevent and treat
eczema
(a)

Moisturize your skin regularly.

(b) Protect skin from strong winds.
(c)

Protect skin from temperature extremes (hot or cold).

(d) Keep the area clean especially if skin cracks.
(e)

Keep bathing and shower times short.

(f)

Keep your diet healthy and add vitamins.

(g) Use medications strictly as directed.
(h) Try to reduce stress.
(i)

Do not vigorously scratch or irritate skin.

(j)

Do not bathe with hot water.

(k)

Do not expose skin to harsh chemicals, solvents, vehicle
lubricants, etc.

(l)

Do not wear woolen clothing.

(m) Avoid wearing tight fitting clothing especially made of
synthetic fibers.
(n) Do not apply hydrocortisone creams without medical advice
for long periods.

References
(1)

Shastri KN et al. Charaka samhita commentary. Sootrasthana 25, 40.
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Bharati Academy, 2005. p. 468.

(2)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 1. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha. 2002. p. 447.

(3)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy. 2001. p. 202.

Further reading
(1)

Chatterjee A, Prakashi SC. The treatise on Indian medicinal plants.
Vol. 2. New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate, Council
of Science and Industrial Research, 1992.

(2)

Chopra RN et al. Glossary of Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi:
Publications and Information Directorate, Council of Science and
Industrial Research, 1956.

(3)

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1982.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

48

(4)

Ganguli NB, Bhatt EM. Mode of action of active principles from stem
bark of Albizzia lebbeck (L.) Benth. Indian Journal of Exptl. Biol.
31(2), 1993.

(5)

Warrier, PK et al. Eds. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. 1. Madras: Orient
Longman Ltd., 1994.

(6)

Indian Council of Medical Research. Medicinal plants of India. Vol. I.
New Delhi: ICMR, 1976.

(7)

Mitra Roma. Bibliography on pharmcognosy of medicinal plants.
Lucknow: National Botanical Research Institute, 1985.

(8)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Pharmacological
investigations of certain medicinal plants and compound formulations
used in Ayurveda and Siddha New Delhi: Central Council of Research
in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1996.

(9)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Phytochemical
investigations of certain medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. New Delhi:
Central Council of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1990.

(10) Sharma AD. Bhaishajyaratnavali, chaukhambha. Varanasi: Sanskrit
Sansthana, 1981.
(11) Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. The Wealth of India: raw
materials. Vol. I, A (Rev.). New Delhi: CSIR, 1985.
(12) Tripathi P. Steriodgenic effect of Albizzia lebbeck Benth. in Guinea pigs.
Ancient Science of Life. 2(3), 1983.
(13) Tripathi RM, Sen PC, Das PK. Studies on mechanism of action of Albizzia
lebbeck, an Indian indigenous drug in the treatment of atopic allergy.
Journal of Ethnopharmacology. I(4), 1979.
(14) Tripathi RM, Sen PC, Das PK. Further studies on the mechanism of
anti-anaphylactic action of Albizzia lebbeck, an Indian indigenous drug.
Journal of Ethnopharmacology. I(4), 1979.

49

9
Triphala decoction for eye discharge

Liquid discharge from the eye other than tears, with or without
burning and itching, is found in many eye conditions and can also be
due to environmental pollutants. Mostly, eye discharge is a common
symptom in the inflammatory and allergic conditions of the eye. In
viral conjunctivitis, the eye becomes red or bloodshot and irritation
causes discharge but this condition does not last more than 10 days
or so, if uncomplicated and proper hygienic care is taken. Bacterial
conjunctivitis is not common, but when it develops as thick eye
discharge of white, yellow or greenish colour; it is advisable to seek
medical advice.
Cigarette smoke, chlorine in swimming pool water and chemicals in
make-up materials are some of the uncommon causes of eye discharge.
In such cases, eye discharge and other associated symptoms appear
on contact with the irritant and do not last long. Specific medication
is not required but the cause of eye irritation should be avoided.
Thin watery discharge coupled with itching and burning in the
eyes is due to allergy and it is sometimes very uncomfortable. This
condition necessitates determination of the cause of allergy.
For eye discharge, the simple principle of treatment recommended
in Ayurvedic literature is to avoid the causative factor and palliate
the symptom with medicines having antagonistic properties. Triphala
decoction is one such medicine which is widely popular and considered
to be quite effective in alleviating various eye symptoms including
discharge, inflammation and irritation.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

50

Triphala decoction
Fruits of three myrobalans are collectively designated as Triphala
in Ayurveda, meaning the three specific fruits put together. This
formulation is included in the Ayurvedic Formulary of India1 and
the ingredients are described in Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia2. It finds
vivid description in Ayurveda literature and is frequently used by
practitioners inter alia in the treatment of eye diseases, particularly
conjunctivitis and vision disorders. Both Kvatha (decoction) and
Churna (powder) of Triphala are indicated respectively for external
and internal use in eye disorders.
Triphala decoction is mainly used for washing inflamed eyes with
purulent discharge or as eye drops in controlling conjunctivitis. Apart
from providing relief in inflammation-induced eye symptoms with its
decongestant, anti-inflammatory and soothing effects, instillation of
Triphala decoction in eyes is proven to have prophylactic value for
preventing viral conjunctivitis during epidemics.
Composition
Decoction of Triphala is prepared by boiling together in water
the coarse powder of dried fruits of the following three medicinal
plants.
English

Local Name

Latin Name

Haritaki

Terminalia

Chebulic

chebula Retz.

myrobalan

Terminalia

Belliric

belerica

myrobalan

Bibhitaki

Name

Family

Parts
Used

Combretaceae

Fruit

Combretaceae

Fruit

Euphorbiaceae

Fruit

Roxb.
Amalaki

Phyllanthus

Emblic

emblica Linn.

myrobalan

Main chemical constituents
Triphala as a whole is rich in vitamin C, gallic acid and tannins.
Ingredient-wise the main chemical constituents are:

Haritaki3:

Tannins, anthraquinones and polyphenolic compounds.

4

Gallic acid, tannic acid and glycosides.

5

Vitamin C, carotene, nicotinic acid, riboflavin and tannins.

Bibhitaki :
Amalaki :

51

Haritaki fruits and leaves.

Dried fruits of Haritaki.

Bibhitaki fruits and leaves.

Dried fruits of Bibhitaki.

Amalaki fruits and leaves.

Dried fruits of Amalaki.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

52

Quality standards
Simple quality parameters for selection of raw materials could be
followed for having desired efficacy from Triphala decoction.
Foreign
Matter

Total Ash

Acid
Soluble
Ash

Alcohol
Soluble
Ash

Water
Soluble
Extractives

Haritaki6

Not more
than 1%

Not more
than 5%

Not more
than 5%

Not less
than 40%

Not less than
60%

Bibhitaki7

Not more
than 2%

Not more
than 7%

Not more
than 1%

Not less
than 8%

Not less than
35%

Amalaki8

Not more
than 3%

Not more
than 7%

Not more
than 2%

Not less
than 40%

Not less than
50%

Ingredient

Method of preparation
Triphala decoction for cleansing eyes is prepared the following
way:
(1) Clean the dried fruits and remove the seeds.
(2) Take the required amount of each ingredient that is sufficient
for the course of treatment. For 15 days’ treatment, 500 grams
of each ingredient is needed.
(3) Make coarse powder separately of the three dried fruits.
(4) Mix together the three powders in equal amounts to form a
uniform mixture.
(5) Take 10 to 50 grams of the mixture for one application and soak
it for about an hour in 16 times water. Then boil till half of the
water remains. Filter the decoction through fine cotton cloth and
keep in a clean bowl or jug. Slightly warm decoction should be
used for washing eyes at the earliest after its preparation.
(6) For use in children and sensitive individuals, soak 50 grams
of powdered Triphala in 200 milliliters of hot water for half an
hour, filter and use it lukewarm.

Dosage form
Slightly warm, dark-brownish coloured liquid.
Therapeutic properties1
Anti-inflammatory, decongestant, soothing and wound healing
properties.

53

Dose and mode of administration
Sufficient quantity of Triphala decoction, say about 100 to 200
milliliters, is required to wash eyes in one of the following ways:
(1) Dip a small piece of sterilized cotton in slightly warm Triphala
decoction and clean with it each eye 3-5 times from nasal side
outwards; each time with separate cotton. Wipe the eyes with
clean and sterilized cotton or soft cloth. Do this procedure two
to three times a day.
(2) Ask the patient to lie down on the back. Irrigate the open eyes,
one by one, with Triphala decoction poured through a clean
and sterilized dropper. The procedure may be done twice or
thrice a day.
(3)

Akshi Tarpana: With patient lying down on back, first clean
the eyes with cotton or soft cloth soaked in clean water and
then make rings of wheat-flour dough around both eyes. Put
Triphala decoction in the rings in such a way as it may not spill
out. Keep this position for 5 to 10 minutes and ask the patient
to blink eyes and move eye balls in between. This procedure
should be done at least twice a day.

Indications and uses
Triphala decoction is used for washing eyes in acute and chronic
infections and inflammatory diseases of eye including trachoma,
where watery or purulent discharge is the main symptom. It is also
recommended for oral use in various eye diseases.
Precautions and safety aspects
(1) Due care must be taken to make and keep the decoction in a
clean utensil. Do not keep the decoction uncovered and in an
unhygienic place. Dipping fingers in the decoction to judge its
temperature should be strictly avoided.
(2) Too hot and too cold decoctions should not be used as they
may not yield the desired results.
(3) Frequency of eye wash should be determined on the basis of
the severity of symptoms. It is advisable to wash the affected
eye at least twice a day and for each application fresh decoction
should be prepared.
(4) Warm compresses should be applied to soften and remove
crusts in the eyelids, before washing the eyes. Softened crusts
can be removed with cotton.
(5) Medical advice must be sought, if vision is decreased, the eye
pain gets severe, the discharge is thick and frankly purulent or
greenish or bloody and light sensitivity is intense.
Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

54

(6) Do not continue using Triphala decoction in case eye symptoms
of itching, discharge, redness etc. worsen or do not improve
in one to two weeks.
(7)

Haritaki, Bibhitaki and Amalaki fruits are traditionally considered
safe in the prescribed doses and no adverse effects are reported
in the literature.

References
(1)

India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary of
India. Part II. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
and Homeopathy, 2000. p. 72.

(2)

India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia
of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 5, 26, 47.

(3)

India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia
of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 48.

(4)

India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia
of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 26.

(5)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2001. p. 14.

(6)

India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia
of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 47.

(7)

India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia
of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 26.

(8)

India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia
of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 5.

Further reading
(1)

Juss SS. Triphala – the wonder drugs. Indian Med. Gaz., 1997.

(2)

Mehta BK, Shitut S, Wankhade H. In vitro antimicrobial efficacy of
Triphala. Fitoterapia. 1993.

(3)

Mitra AK, Gupta AK, Debdas M. Clinical observations on an herbal eye
drops preparation. Antiseptic. 1986.

(4)

Tambvekar NR. Ayurvedic drugs in common eye conditions. J. Nat.
Integ. Med. Assoc., 1985.

(5)

Thakare RP. Studies on the anti-bacterial activity of some plant extracts.
Indian Drugs. 1979-80.

55

10
Kiratatikta powder in fever

Fever, also known as pyrexia, is a common medical symptom as well
as a sign that indicates an increase in internal body temperature to
levels above normal. Fever results from a temporary elevation in the
body’s thermoregulatory set-point, which is usually set at a normal
temperature of 37o C (98.6o F). Body temperature varies with time
of the day, with lower levels in the morning and higher levels in the
evening.
Fever is present if oral temperature is over 37.2o C (98.96o F) in
the morning and 37.7o C (99.86o F) in the evening, the corresponding
rectal temperature (in anal canal) would be 0.4o C (0.72o F) higher. In
addition to diurnal variations, body temperature is also influenced by
age and gender (especially women in reproductive age group). Fever
is not considered medically significant until body temperature is above
38° C (100.4° F). There are different accompanying symptoms of fever,
which depend on its underlying causes. These include chills, rigors,
malaise, arthralgia, anorexia, fatigue, dizziness, sweating, etc.
Fever serves as one of the body’s natural defense against
microbes. For that reason, low fevers should normally go untreated,
unless accompanied by troubling symptoms. Fever is termed as low
grade if it is between 38o–39° C (100.4o–102.2° F), moderate if it
ranges within 39o–40°C (102.2o –104.0° F) and high grade if it is
over 40° C (104.0° F). Depending upon the course of fever, fever
can be:
(1) Continuous fever, if the temperature remains above normal
throughout the day and does not fluctuate more than 1o C
(1.8o F) in 24 hours; e.g. urinary tract infections, typhoid, lobar
pneumonia.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

56

(2) Intermittent fever, if fever touches base line for several hours
of the day. If the spike occurs every day it is quotidian, spike
every alternate day is called tertian and if this occurs after every
third day then it is quartan intermittent fever; e.g. malaria.
(3) Remittent fever, if the temperature remains above normal
throughout the day with fluctuations of more than 1 degree
Celsius; e.g. infective endocarditis.
(4) Irregular fever if the pattern does not fit into any of the patterns
indicated above.

Causes of fever
(1) Infectious diseases: viral infections, malaria, influenza,
sore throat, typhoid, pneumonia, measles, chickenpox,
tuberculosis.
(2) Tissue injury.
(3) Cancers of liver, kidney, lymph nodes.
(4) Immuno-inflammatory diseases such as systemic lupus
erythematosus, vasculitis.
(5) Drugs and toxins.
(6) Exposure to high environmental temperature.
(7) Fever of unknown cause.

The main risk of moderate to high fever is dehydration. Patients
with fever need more fluids than usual. Body temperature greater
than 41.67o C (107o F), can result in brain damage and possibly
death. Whatever may be the cause, uncomplicated mild to moderate
fever can be managed with a simple herbal preparation mentioned
in Ayurvedic classics such as Kiratatikta.

Kiratatikta [Swertia chirata (Roxb. ex Fleming)
H. Karst]
Kiratatikta powder consists of dried, matured pieces of whole plant
of Swertia chirata (Roxb. ex Fleming) H. Karst, an erect, annual,
herbaceous plant. It is about 0.6-1.25 metres high, found in temperate
Himalayas at an altitude of between 1200-3000 metres from Kashmir
to Bhutan and Khasia Hills in Meghalaya. The plant is collected when it
flowers during July to October and dried in the shade. The formulation
is mentioned in classical Ayurvedic texts, Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia
and Ayurvedic Formulary of India for various types of fever.

57

Composition
The formulation is a powder made from dried, matured pieces of
whole plant of Swertia chirata.
English name

Chiretta, Chirata, Brown chiretta, white chiretta

Latin name

Swertia chirata (Roxb. ex Fleming) H. Karst

Family

Gentianaceae

Part used

Whole plant

A Swertia chirata plant.

Dried Swertia chirata plants.

Main chemical constituents1
Xanthones, xanthone glycoside and mangiferine (flavonoid).
Quality standards1
Foreign matter

Not more than 2%

Total ash

Not more than 6%

Acid insoluble ash

Not more than 1%

Alcohol (60%) soluble
extractive

Not less than 10%

Water-soluble extractive

Not less than 10%

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

58

Method of preparation
Take dried whole plant of Kiratatikta and further dry it in the shade
to remove moisture for easy powdering or making coarse powder
for decoction.
(1) Grind the material in a grinder or pulverizer until fine powder
or coarse powder is obtained.
(2) For obtaining the fine powder filter it through mesh size 85.
Coarse powder is used as such for decoction, there is no need
to filter it.
(3) The shelf life of the powder is four months but it can retain
its potency if kept in an air-tight container and protected from
direct sunlight and heat.

Dosage form
Dark-brownish bitter powder or warm, dark brownish bitter liquid.
Therapeutic properties2
Anti-pyretic, anti-malarial, anthelmintic, anti-leishminial, antiinflammatory, anti-tubercular, cholagogue, hepatoprotective, antidiabetic, laxative, stomachic, tonic.
Dose and mode of administration
The dose of Kiratatikta powder for adults is 1-3 grams and for children
it is 250 mg to 500 mg, with water. The dose of decoction for adults
is 25-30 ml and for children, it is 5 ml to 10 ml, to be taken twice
a day after meals.
Indications and uses
Fevers of known and unknown causes.
Precautions and safety aspects
(1) Although no toxic effects are reported with Kiratatikta, the
patient taking oral hypoglycemic drugs should take the medicine
under medical supervision as Kiratatikta may interact with oral
hypoglycemic drugs potentiating its hypoglycaemic action.

59

(2) Medication with Kiratatikta should be stopped, if the intensity of
fever does not decrease within a few hours and the symptoms
aggravate. Chronic and severely feverish patients should
consume Kiratatikta under medical supervision.
(3) Pregnant women should take this medication under medical
supervision. However, it is safe for the baby if the nursing
mother is taking this medication.

References
(1)

India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia
of India. Part I. Vol. 1. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 72.

(2)

Billore KV et al. Database on Medicinal Plants Used in Ayurveda, Vol.
7. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha,
2005. p. 227, 229.

Further reading
(1)

Duke JA, Godwin MJB, Du Cellier J and Duke PAK. Duke JA. Eds.
Handbook of medicinal herbs. Washington DC, CRC Press, 2002.

(2)

Gogte VM. Ayurvedic pharmacology & therapeutic uses of medicinal
plants. Mumbai: Bharatiya Vidyabhavana, 2000.

(3)

Goyal H, Sukumar S, Purushothaman KK. Antimalarials from Indian
medicinal plants. J. Res. Ayur. Sid. 1981.

(4)

Grover J, Yadav S, Vats V. Medicinal plants of India with anti-diabetic
potential. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2002.

(5)

Henriette’s herbal homepage. http://www.henriettesherbal.com (accessed
19 February 2010).

(6)

Sabnis Mukund. Chemistry & pharmacology of Ayurvedic medicinal
plants. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Amar Bharati Prakashana, 2006.

(7)

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna-vijnana. Vol. II, Varanasi: Chaukhamba Bharati
Academy, 1981.

(8)

National Institute of Science Communication and Information
Resources, The useful plants of India. New Delhi: Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research, 2000.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

61

11
Karanja powder for fungal dermatosis

Chronic fungal infection of the skin, hair, or nails is caused by
specific species of fungi such as Trichophyton, Microsporum and
Epidermophyton. In layman’s terms, the condition is called “ringworm”
or tinea infection which is extremely common in general practice.
Ringworm is characterized by round lesions (rings) and there are
multiple terms for ringworm infection of various body sites such as;
tinea corporis (body), tinea paedis (feet), tinea unguium (nail), tinea
capitis (scalp) or tinea cruris (groin).
It is highly contagious and can spread through contact with an
infected person, animal, and objects like contaminated toilet articles,
clothing, pool surfaces, showers, locker rooms and even soil. Acquisition
of ringworm appears to be favoured by minor trauma (including that
incurred during wrestling), maceration and poor hygiene of the skin.
Heat and moisture help fungi grow and thrive, which makes them
more common in areas of frequent sweating as well as skin folds in
groins or between toes.
The signs and symptoms vary with the site of infection and the
fungal species involved. Foot infection (athlete’s foot, tinea paedis) may
present as fissuring of the toe webs, scaling of the plantar surfaces or
vesicles around the toe webs and soles. Inter-digital lesions may be
itchy but become painful when bacterial superinfection occurs. Hand
infection is less common but it resembles foot infection. Scalp infection
(tinea capitis) is characterized by areas of alopecia and scaling. Nail
infection (tinea unguium) presents as a white discoloration of the
nails or as thickening, chalkiness and crumbling of the nails. Tinea
of the groin (‘jock itch’) tends to have a darkening of skin colour and
extends from the folds of the groin down onto one or both thighs.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

62

Though skin fungal infection like ringworm is not so easy to treat,
recent uncomplicated infection can be checked by one of the most
popular herbal powders and oil made from a single drug, Karanja,
and also by maintaining hygiene and following certain do’s and don’ts
given in the Ayurvedic literature.
(1) Keep the affected part clean, wash it daily with warm water
and wipe dry.
(2) Local application of simple medicaments like neem oil, turmeric
paste made with water or sulphur ointment can provide added
effect.
(3) It is always advisable to continue the treatment for sometime,
even if symptoms come under control.
(4)

The cloth once used at the affected part should be reused only
after washing and dipping in an antiseptic solution.

(5) Curd and heavy foods should be avoided. Food items with bitter
taste are beneficial.

Karanja (Pongamia pinnata Linn. Merr.)
Karanja botanically known as Pongamia pinnata Linn., is a mediumsized tree with a short bole and spreading crown and found almost
throughout India up to an altitude of 1200 metres. Karanja seeds
are used internally as well as externally in various types of skin
aliments including fungal skin disease. Seed oil is highly esteemed for
medicinal purposes and is indicated for local application in scabies,
herpes, leucoderma and other cutaneous diseases. This remedy is
also enlisted in Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia of India for management
of various skin diseases1.
Composition
Pongamia oil is extracted from Karanja seeds for local application
on affected parts.
English name

Indian beech, smooth leaved pongamia, Pongam
oil tree

Latin name

Pongamia pinnata Linn.

Family

Fabaceae

Part used

Seeds

63

A flowering Pongamia pinnata branch
with pods.

Dried Pongamia pinnata fruits
and seeds.

Main chemical constituents2
Karanja seeds contain fixed oil, flavones and traces of essential
oil.
Quality standards2
Foreign matter

Not more than 2%

Total ash

Not more than 11%

Acid-insoluble ash

Not more than 3.5%

Alcohol-soluble extractives

Not less than 10%

Water-soluble extractive

Not less than 16%

Method of preparation
(1) Preparation of powder:
•

Clean the dried fruits of Karanja by removing dust and
other foreign particles. Remove the seeds from the shells
and grind them into powder form.

•

Filter the powder through sieve. Store in air-tight container,
away from direct sunlight and in a cool and dry place.

•

It is always good to use fresh Karanja seed powder for
better results. It can be used only up to four months.

(2) Preparation of oil:
•

Pongamia oil is extracted by crushing seeds of Karanja.
Purified Pongamia oil available in the market can also be
used.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

64

Dosage form
Dusty powder and yellowish orange oil.
Dose and mode of administration
(1) The adult dose of Karanja seed powder is 250 mg and for
children the dose is 30 mg to 60 mg, to be taken orally twice
daily with lukewarm water after meals.
(2) Simultaneously, Pongamia oil is to be applied on the affected
skin as per the requirement. Pongamia oil can be applied alone
or in combination with sesame oil or neem oil.

Therapeutic properties3
Karanja has anthelmintic, insecticidal, anti-bacterial, anti-fungal,
nematocidal, and wound-healing properties.
Indications and uses4
Karanja is indicated for skin diseases such as ringworm, scabies,
eczema, urticaria, erysipelas, leucoderma, leprosy, gonorrhoea,
herpes (shingles or herpes zoster and also against herpes genitalis),
impetigo and pityriasis versicolor.
Precaution and safety aspects
(1) Overdose of Karanja seed powder should be avoided. If any
adverse effect is observed, stop taking it further.
(2) Internal use of Pongamia oil is reported to have adverse effects
due to its toxic components3 and hence should be avoided.
(3) Adverse effects with external use of Pongamia oil are not
reported but be observant while using this medicament.
(4) Internal use of Karanja is not advisable for pregnant women
and nursing mothers.

References
(1)

India. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy. 2001. p. 63-64.

(2)

India. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 63.

65

(3)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Data base on medicinal plants
used in Ayurveda. Vol. II. New Delhi: Central Council for Research
in Ayurveda & Siddha, 2002. p. 295.

(4)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Data base on medicinal plants
used in Ayurveda. Vol. II. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda & Siddha, 2002. p. 293-296.

Further reading
(1)

Aneja R, Khanna RN, Seshadri TR. Six–methoxyfuroflavone, a new
component of the seeds of Pongamia glabra. J. of Chem. Soc. 1996.

(2)

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha nighantu.
Bharati Academy, 1984.

(3)

Warrier P.K. et al. Eds. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. IV. Madras: Orient
Longman Ltd., 1997.

(4)

Pharmacological investigations of certain medicinal plants and
compound formulations used in Ayurveda and Siddha. New Delhi:
Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1996.

(5)

Phyto-chemical investigations of certain medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and
Siddha, 1990.

(6)

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna vigyana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukahambha
Bharati Academy, 1996.

(7)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Data base on medicinal plants
used in Ayurveda. Vol. II. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda & Siddha, 2002.

(8)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of
Medicine & Homeopathy, 2003.

Varanasi: Chaukhambha

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

67

12
Pippalimoola powder for headache

Headache is defined as a pain in the head or upper neck. Headache
can be a symptom of an underlying serious disease or it can be a
disease itself. Headache can be due to many causes. Common benign
causes of headache include: migraine, refractory error, mental tension,
sinusitis, flu, viral fever, typhoid, etc. Some of the serious and lifethreatening causes of headache include cerebral haemorrhage, subarachnoid haemorrhage, intracranial space occupying lesions (tumour),
acute and chronic meningitis, brain abscess, etc. Trigeminal neuralgia
can be a difficult and intractable cause of headache though not life
threatening. Sudden and severe headache associated with symptoms
like high fever, vomiting, convulsion, visual symptoms, stiffness in the
neck and loss of consciousness warrant urgent medical attention.
Mild to moderate headache without any specificity can be
managed with simple remedies such as Pippalimoola, which is
specifically documented for the management of headache in Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia, Ayurvedic formulary and in various classical texts.

Pippalimoola (Root of Piper longum Linn.)
Pippalimool means roots of Pippali (long pepper) plant. The roots are
perennial, woody, and aromatic and are used in powder form with
warm water, milk or preferably with ghrita (clarified butter). Many
references regarding the therapeutic use of Pippalimoola are available
in ancient classical Ayurvedic texts for its carminative, antispasmodic
and sedative actions. Use of ghrita with Pippalimool is emphasized
because of its ability to negate hot and dry properties of Pippalimool
and facilitate drug action for alleviation of vitiated Vata dosha, which is

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

68

considered as the underlying bio-humour responsible for the causation
of headache. Ghrita is also known to be beneficial for mental faculties
and recommended for use alone or with medicinal formulations for
psychological problems including stress-induced headache, disturbed
sleep and impaired mental concentration.
Composition
Pippalimoola powder consists of roots of Pippali
English name

Long Pepper

Latin name

Piper longum Linn.

Family

Piperaceae

Part used

Fruit

A flowering Pongamia pinnata branch
with pods.

Dried Pongamia pinnata fruits
and seeds.

Main chemical constituents1
Alkaloids (Piperine, Piperlongumine, Piperlonguminine, etc.), essential
oils.

Quality standards1
Foreign matter

Not more than 2%

Total ash

Not more than 5.5%

Acid-insoluble ash

Not more than 0.2%

Alcohol-soluble extractive

Not less than 4.0%

Water-soluble extractive

Not less than 12%

69

Method of preparation
(1) Take 40 grams of dried roots of Pippali. Dry it further for
removing moisture for easy powdering. Roots should not have
been collected more than one year ago.
(2) Grind the roots in a grinder or pulverizer till fine powder is
obtained.
(3) Filter the powder through mesh size 85.
(4) Keep the powder in a dry and air-tight plastic or glass
container.

Dosage form
Reddish-brown to creamy-grey bitter powder.

Therapeutic properties2
The roots of Pippali have thermogenic, tonic, diuretic, purgative
expectorant, anthelmintic, stomachic, digestive, emmenagogue,
anti-bacterial, anti-inflammatory, central nervous system stimulant,
antispasmodic, and analeptic properties.
Indication and uses
Headache, insomnia, cough, cold, and chronic bronchitis.
Dose and mode of administration
Dose of the powder for adults is 2 to 3 grams and for children it is
250 mg to 500 mg, to be taken twice daily, preferably on an empty
stomach mixed with 3 to 5 gm of ghee or butter or honey and
followed by warm water or milk.
Precautions and safety aspects
(1) No toxic effect or adverse reaction is reported with recommended
dose of Pippali root powder.
(2)

Pippali root should be used with caution in the first trimester of
pregnancy. However, it is safe for the baby if a nursing mother
is taking this medication.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

70

(3) Pippalimool is hot in nature, so should be used with caution in
summer and by hot temperament individuals and menstruating
women.
(4) During medication with Pippalimool, diet should be simple, easily
digestible and free from spicy and pungent-bitter-astringent
food items.

References
(1)

India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia
of India. Part I. Vol. II. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of
Medicine & Homeopathy. 2001. p. 134.

(2)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2001. p. 473.

Further reading
(1)

Atmaram et al. The Wealth of India. Vol. 8. New Delhi: Council of
Scientific & Industrial Research, 2003.

(2)

Shastri Brahmashankar, Vaishya Ruplal. Eds. Bhavaprakasha nighantu.
Part 1. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthana, 1999.

(3)

Gupta AK. Quality standards of Indian medicinal plants. Vol.1. New
Delhi: Indian Council of Medical Research, 2003.

(4)

Kirtikar KR, Basu BD. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. III. Allahabad:
L.M. Basu, 1981.

71

13
Chaturbhadra decoction for indigestion

Improper digestion of food usually results from over eating, frequent
eating without having the feeling to eat, untimely eating, emotional
outbursts and improper sleep. Decreased secretion of digestive juices is
a relatively less common cause of indigestion. Usually there is a relative
deficiency of digestive enzymes, an imbalance of gastrointestinal
environment and impaired movement of the intestines. In order to
facilitate proper digestion, food should be taken on time, in the right
amount and should be of proper contents.
Individuals with a stressful lifestyle mostly suffer from persistent
low-grade indigestion with acute attacks in between because of dietary
indiscrimination. Indigestion can also result from gastrointestinal
infection, consumption of contaminated food or due to certain
medicines, which cause irritation in the stomach and in the upper
part of the intestine.
Indigestion becomes apparent with a feeling of fullness or
heaviness in the abdomen, low appetite, nausea, abnormal taste in
mouth and disturbed bowel movements in the form of constipation
or loose motions. In acidic indigestion, sour eructation or belching
and water brash are usually present. Indigestion is primarily a selflimiting condition manageable with avoidance of solid food for a day
or two followed by intake of soft, light and easily digestible food for
a couple of days.
Severe and prolonged indigestion, however, always needs
medication and can be effectively managed with simple digestive
herbal formulations such as Chaturbhadra decoction.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

72

Chaturbhadra decoction
Chaturbhadra decoction is a herbal formulation listed in the Ayurvedic
Formulary of India1 for management of indigestion and indigestioninduced gastro-intestinal problems. Its ingredients are individually
described in the Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia and are reported to have
therapeutic properties useful for management of bowel disorders
including impaired digestion, diarrhoea, vomiting, loss of appetite
and protozoal infection. The formulation is carminative and astringent
and it improves the digestive and gastro-intestinal functions.
Composition
Chaturbhadra decoction is made from the following four ingredients
in equal parts.
Sr.
No.

Name of
the Drug

English
Name

1.

Ativisha

Indian
Atis

Aconitum
heterophyllum
Wall.ex.Royle

Ranunculaceae

Root

2.

Guduchi

Tinospora

Tinospora
cordifolia (Willd.)
Miers. ex. Hk.f.
& Th.

Menispermaceae

Stem

3

Mustaka

Nut grass

Cyperus rotundus
Linn.

Cyperaceae

Rhizome

4

Shunthi

Ginger

Zingiber officinale
Rosc.

Zingiberaceae

Rhizome

Ativisha twig.

Latin Name

Family

Dried Ativisha roots.

Part
Used

73

Mustaka plants.

Mustaka rhizomes.

Guduchi stem with leaves and fruits.

Guduchi stems.

Shunthi plant with exposed rhizomes.

Dried Shunthi rhizomes.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

74

Main chemical constituents
(1)

Ativisha3 : Alkaloids like atisine, dihydroatisine, hetisine,
etc.

(2)

Guduchi2 : Terpenoids, alkaloids, etc.

(3)

Mustaka5 : Volatile oil.

(4)

Shunthi4 : Essential oil, pungent constituents: gingerols and
shogaols, resinous matter and starch.

Quality standards
For quality assurance, physical constants of the ingredients used in
the formulation should be as under.
Water
Soluble
Ash

Acid
Soluble
Ash

Alcohol
Soluble
Extractive

Water
Soluble
Extractive

Not more
than 4%

-

Not more
than 1%

Not less
than 6%

Not less
than 24%

-

Not more
than 2%

Not more
than 16%

-

Not more
than 3%

Not less
than 3%

Not less
than 11%

-

Mustaka5:

Not more
than 2%

Not more
than 8%

-

Not more
than 4%

Not less
than 5%

Not less
than11%

Not less
than 1%

Shunthi4

Not more
than 1%

Not more
than 6%

Not less
than
1.5%

-

Not less
than 3%

Not less
than 10%

-

Foreign
Matter

Total Ash

Ativisha3

Not more
than 2%

Guduchi2

Ingredient

Volatile
Oil

Method of preparation
The decoction is prepared as follows:
(1) First dry and clean all the four ingredients.
(2) Make coarse powder of each ingredient.
(3) Take the coarse powder of all the four drugs in equal quantity
and mix properly.
(4) The mixture should be stored in an air-tight container for use
within one year, after which its potency is reduced.
(5) Boil 10 grams of the mixture in 160 millilitres of water till one
fourth water remains.
(6) Filter the liquid.
(7) Add 1-2 grams of fine powder of ginger (Zingiber officinale Rosc.)
and cumin seeds (Cuminum cyminum Linn.) in the decoction
just before taking, to make it more effective.

75

Dosage form
Warm, light-brownish decoction.
Therapeutic properties1
Chaturbhadra decoction has digestive, appetizing, anti-emetic,
stomachic, carminative and anti-diarrhoeal properties.
Dose and mode of administration
The dose of Chaturbhadra decoction for adults is 40 millilitres of
freshly prepared warm decoction and 5-10 ml for children, to be
administered twice a day before meals. It is advisable to sip the
decoction instead of swallowing it in one lot.
Indications and uses
(1) The decoction is mainly used for the management of indigestion
resulting from overeating, untimely meals and consumption of
heavy food items and from liver dysfunction.
(2) Other indications include poor appetite, vomiting, flatulence,
nausea and indigestion associated with diarrhoea and
dysentery.
(3) Gastro-intestinal upsets due to giardia and amoebic infections
can also be managed with Chaturbhadra decoction6.

Precautions and safety aspects
(1) Freshly prepared decoction should be used always. Stale
decoction may not be useful.
(2) Individuals not liking the taste of the formulation can add sugar
or honey.
(3) To facilitate recovery, patients should consume soft, light and
semisolid or liquid diet and avoid cold and heavy foods and
raw vegetables.
(4) If indigestion is induced or aggravated due to stress, mental
relaxation must be achieved.
(5) The formulation is traditionally considered to be safe in the
recommended doses and side effects are mostly unlikely.
However, due to presence of Ativisha and Shunthi in the
formulation, an overdose may cause symptoms like dryness
of mouth, tremor, nervous depression, etc.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

76

(6) Pregnant women should use the formulation under medical
supervision.
(7) It is safe for the baby if the nursing mother is taking this
medication.

References
(1)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Second revised English edition. Part I. New Delhi: Department
of Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2003. p. 54.

(2)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 42.

(3)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 23.

(4)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 104.

(5)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p.130.

(6)

Billore KV et al. Database on Medicinal Plants Used in Ayurveda, Vol.
7. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha,
2005. p. 40.

Further reading
(1)

Bhatt AD, Bhatt NS. Indigenous drugs and liver disease. Indian J.
Gastroenterology, 15(2), 1996.

(2)

Billore KV et al. Database on medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. Vol.
7. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha,
2005.

(3)

Khare CP. Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi: Springer (India) Pvt.
Ltd, 2007.

(4)

Newall CA, Anderson LA, Phillipson JD. Herbal medicines: a guide for
health care professionals. London: The Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.

(5)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants
used in Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda and Siddha, 2001.

(6)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used
in Ayurveda. Vol. 5. New Delhi: India Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda and Siddha, 2002.

(7)

Shastri AD. Bhaishajyaratnavali. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit
Sansthan, 1999.

77

(8)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001.

(9)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

79

14
Katuka powder for jaundice

Jaundice is yellowish discolouration of the sclera (white part of the
eyes) and skin caused by high levels of bilirubin in the blood. It is a
major symptom and sign of serious disease of many organ systems;
most important among them being the liver. Jaundice is often
associated with yellow urination which reflects excessive excretion
of bilirubin in the urine as well. There is a direct correlation between
the blood levels of bilirubin and the extent of tissue discoloration.
Jaundice reflects a deranged state of bilirubin metabolism.
Bilirubin is a waste product produced in the body from the globin
part of haemoglobin, which is released from the destruction of old
red blood cells and remains in the blood after iron is removed. It is
the liver that is responsible to remove bilirubin from the blood by
conjugating it and then secreting bilirubin containing bile into the
intestine via bile ducts. Jaundice may result from the following three
main conditions:
(1) Due to over-production of bilirubin exceeding the capacity of
the liver to remove it from the blood. This kind of jaundice
is found in excessive breakdown of red blood cells due to
their defective formation, or due to the effect of toxins or
certain drugs when a large amount of bilirubin is released
into blood.
(2) Due to functional disturbance of the liver that prevents removal,
conversion and secretion of bilirubin. It is characteristic of
hepatitis.
(3) Due to blockage of the bile ducts causing reduced flow of
bile and bilirubin from the liver into the intestines. It is seen
in conditions in which bile ducts get obstructed due to gall
stones, cancer or inflammation.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

80

Symptoms
If the jaundice is due to liver disease – hepatitis, the patient apart
from yellowish colouration of eyes and skin may have symptoms like
loss of appetite, mild fever, fatigue, weakness and exhaustion. The
liver may be slightly enlarged and tender. The stool may be light in
colour but the urine is yellow. In haemolytic jaundice, the patient
suffers from anaemia and both the urine and stool are of orange
colour. In jaundice caused by blockage of the bile ducts, bile does
not enter the intestines so there is impairment of fat digestion and
absorption of fat-soluble vitamins. This condition leads to fatty stools
and deficiency symptoms of fat-soluble vitamins. The stool is claycoloured in obstructive jaundice because of the absence of bilirubin
that normally gives stool its brown colour. A troublesome symptom
found in patients with this type of jaundice is itching, which may be
as severe as to cause scratching and disturbed sleep.
The patient’s history can suggest the possible cause for jaundice.
For example, excessive use of alcohol is suggestive of alcoholic liver
disease, whereas use of hepatotoxic drugs suggests drug-toxicityinduced jaundice and sharing of syringes for injection of drugs points
towards viral hepatitis. Attacks of abdominal pain in a patient with
jaundice suggests blockage of the bile ducts usually by gallstones.
Bulky and clay coloured stools and dark urine suggests obstruction
in the passage of bile.
Judicious use of Katuka powder along with necessary dietary
precautions can successfully treat uncomplicated jaundice.

Katuka (Picrorhiza kurroa Royle ex Benth.)
Katuka is a perennial hairy herb grown in alpine regions with
temperate climatic conditions. The medicinal plant in Indian medicine
is named as Katuka or Katuki owing to its immense bitter taste. The
rhizome of the plant is a bitter tonic used for the treatment of febrile
and liver disorders. Uses of Katuka are documented in the ancient
classical texts – Charaka Samhita and Sushruta Samhita. Most of
the Ayurvedic remedies described in literature and commercially
manufactured for jaundice and liver disorders essentially contain
Katuka as one of the ingredients. Katuka and its formulations find
mention in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia and the Ayurvedic Formulary
of India. Apart from highly preferred use of Katuka in the treatment
of jaundice and related diseases by Indian practitioners, scientific
studies have established that it has an anti-inflammatory property,
provides liver protection and improves bilirubin excretion.

81

Composition
Katuka powder is made from dried rhizomes and roots of the plant
for oral use.
English name

Picrorhiza, Hellebore

Latin name

Picrorhiza kurroa Royle ex Benth.

Family

Scrophulariaceae

Part used

Rhizome with roots

Katuka plants with flowering shoots.

Dried Katuka roots.

Main chemical constituents3
Glucosides: picrorhizin and kutkins (mixture of kutkoside and
picroside).
Quality standards4
Identity, purity and potency of Katuka rhizome for its oral use is
estimated on the basis of the following physical constants.
Foreign matter

Not more than 2%

Total ash

Not more than 7%

Acid-insoluble ash

Not more than 1%

Alcohol-soluble extractive

Not less than 10%

Water-soluble extractive

Not less than 20%

Method of preparation
(1) Take 50 grams of dried rhizomes of Katuka. Dry them further
to remove moisture for easy powdering. Rhizomes should not
have been harvested more than one year ago.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

82

(2) Grind rhizomes in a grinder or pulverizer till fine powder is
obtained.
(3) Filter the powder through mesh size 85 to remove coarse fibers
and other particles.
(4) Keep the powder in a dry and air-tight plastic or glass container
and consume it before the next rainy season.

Dosage form
Dusty grey fine powder.
Therapeutic properties
Katuka is a bitter tonic with cooling, laxative, carminative, digestive,
stomachic, cholagogue, hepato-protective, anti-viral, anti-pyretic,
immunomodulating, free-radical scavenging, anti-spasmodic and antiinflammatory properties5. In large doses, it acts like a purgative.
Dose and mode of administration
The dose of Katuka powder for adults is one to three grams and
for children 500 mg to 1 gram, to be taken twice daily with water,
preferably after meals. Consuming the medicine on an empty stomach
should be avoided as it may cause nausea and vomiting due to its
highly bitter taste.
Indications and uses
Katuka is useful in jaundice, liver and spleen dysfunctions, decreased
appetite, flatulence, constipation and piles. It is also used in
intermittent febrile conditions and skin diseases.
Precautions and safety aspects
(1) No side or toxic effects are reported in literature with the
recommended dose of Katuka. Clinical studies have shown no
adverse effects in patients treated with Katuka alone and with
formulations containing Katuka.
(2)

Katuka being a purgative, large doses should be used carefully
in patients with loose motions and in pregnant women. The
dose should be reduced; if stools are watery and associated
with abdominal pain.

(3) Bitter taste of the medicine may induce nausea and vomiting in
sensitive individuals. This tendency can be masked by consuming
the medicine mixed with honey or sweet syrup.

83

(4) Medication with Katuka should be stopped if the intensity of
jaundice does not decrease within three to five days and the
symptoms get aggravated. Chronic and severely jaundiced
patients should consume Katuka under medical supervision.
(5) Jaundice with complications such as body itching, bleeding,
anaemia, edema, loss of weight etc. should be properly
investigated and treated under medical supervision.
(6) Hot, spicy, pungent, sour, fatty and heavy foods should be
avoided. It is advisable to take a soft, semi-solid or liquid
diet during and after medication till normal digestive power is
restored and the blood bilirubin level becomes normal.

References
(1)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I, Vol. II. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 1999. p. 85-87.

(2)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Part I. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
& Homeopathy, 2003. p. 258.

(3)

Billore KV, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ, Chaudhari BG. Database on medicinal
plants used in Ayurveda. Vol. 7. New Delhi: Central Council for Research
in Ayurveda & Siddha, 2005. p. 181-182.

(4)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. II. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 1999. p. 86.

(5)

Billore KV, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ, Chaudhari BG. Database on medicinal
plants used in Ayurveda. Vol. 7. New Delhi: India Central Council for
Research in Ayurveda & Siddha, 2005. p. 180, 182.

Further reading
(1)

Antarkar DS et al. Double blind clinical trial of Arogyavardhini, an
Ayurvedic drug in acute viral hepatitis. Indian J. Med. Res. 1980.

(2)

Chatterjee A, Pakrashi SC. The Treatise on Indian medicinal plants.
Vol. 5. New Delhi: National Institute of Science Communication, Council
of Scientific and Industrial Research, 1997.

(3)

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1999.

(4)

Doreswamy R, Sharma D. Plant drugs for liver disorders management.
Indian Drugs. 1995.

(5)

Warrier, PK et al Eds. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. 4. Madras: Orient
Longman Ltd., 1997.

(6)

Khare CP. Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi: Springer (India) Private
Limited, 2007.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

84

(7)

Indian Council of Medical Research. Medicinal plants of India Vol. II.
New Delhi: 1987.

(8)

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna vijnana. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit
Sansthana, 1981.

(9)

Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plants. Varanasi: Chaukhabha
Visvabharati. 1996.

(10) Vaidya AB et al. Picrorhiza kurroa (Kutaki) royle ex benth as a
hepatoprotective agent – experimental & clinical studies. J. Postgrad.
Med. 1996.

85

15
Ajamoda powder for joint pain

Joint pain or arthralgia is caused by inflammation or degeneration
of tissues in one or more joints. When associated with stiffness,
swelling and painful joint movement it is called arthritis. Joint pain
can be a manifestation of acute febrile illnesses, trauma, excessive
mechanical stress, a variety of medical conditions elsewhere in the
body or a more serious form of disabling arthritis which may be
infective, non-infective or degenerative. The common non-infective
joint diseases with joint pain as a major symptom are rheumatoid
arthritis, osteoarthritis, gout, and non-specific inflammatory arthritis
such as psoriatic arthritis.
Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic, systemic inflammatory disorder
that may affect many tissues and organs, but principally attacks the
joints producing an inflammatory synovitis that often progresses
to destruction of the articular cartilage and ankylosis of the joints.
Although the cause of rheumatoid arthritis is unknown, auto-immunity
plays a pivotal role in its chronicity and progression. The onset of
rheumatoid arthritis in a majority of patients is insidious. Morning
stiffness is its characteristic feature and before the involvement of the
joints the patient may complain of tiredness, fatigue, general malaise,
low grade fever, etc. Generally the small joints of fingers or toes are
initially involved, then it spreads to the wrists, elbow, shoulders, ankles
and knee. The temporo-mandibular joint and sterno-clavicular joint
may also be affected. As the disease progresses, the pain and swelling
of the joints increases. Swelling of the proximal inter-phalangeal joint
and muscular atrophy gives rise to spindled shape of the fingers.
Suggestive clinical features with consistent radiological changes, high
erythrocyte sedimentation rate and a positive rheumatoid factor test
usually help in diagnosing the disease.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

86

Osteoarthritis is a degenerative arthritis resulting from excessive
mechanical stress on a diseased or degenerated joint. It generally
involves big weight-bearing joints such as the knee, hip, spine but
in women it may involve the terminal joints of the fingers. The
patients are frequently obese. Pain in joints initially is intermittent
and appears after using the joints and is relieved by rest. With the
progression of the disease, movement in the affected joints becomes
increasingly limited. Crepitus are felt or heard in the affected joints.
Bony outgrowth may appear on the joint margins.
Gouty arthritis is a form of arthritis which is caused by
accumulation of uric acid crystals inside the joint which evokes an
acute inflammatory response. It is one of the most painful joint
diseases. Gouty arthritis usually strikes a single joint, most commonly
the big toe, however, it can also affect the ankles, knees, wrists,
fingers and elbows. Elderly males are more likely to develop gouty
arthritis than women.
Psoriatic arthritis is a prototype of a group of chronic non-specific
arthritis secondary to a primary immuno-inflammatory disease
elsewhere like skin psoriasis. The exact causes are not yet known,
but several genetic associations have been identified. Psoriatic arthritis
can develop at any stage. However, on average it tends to appear
about 10 years after the first signs of psoriasis. For the majority of
people this is between the ages of 30 and 50, but it can also affect
children. Men and women are equally affected by this condition and
the arthritis symptoms may occur before any skin involvement.
Of the many drugs and preparations for arthritis documented
in Ayurveda, Ajamoda powder is a simple and effective remedy. It
is used internally as well as on the affected joints of the patient in
the form of poultice.

Ajamoda (Apium leptophyllum) (Pers.) F.V.M. ex
Benth.
Ajamoda consists of dried, aromatic fruits of Apium leptophyllum, an
annual herb cultivated in the central and southern states of India.
It is collected by thrashing plants on a mat and dried in shade or
in drying sheds. Ajamoda is a well-known drug for rheumatism and
gout. Ajamoda is one of the chief ingredients in many formulations

87

useful in rheumatoid arthritis. Poultice of crushed fruits can also be
applied to painful joints along with oral use.
English name

Slender celery, Wild celery

Latin name

Apium leptophyllum (Pers.) F.V.M. ex Benth

Family

Apiaceae/Umbelliferae

Parts used

Fruit

Terminal twigs of Ajamoda plant.

Dried Ajamoda seeds.

Main chemical constituents1
Essential oil and fixed oil.
Quality standards1
As per the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, quality standards
determining the identity, purity and strength of Ajamoda fruits are
based on the following:
Foreign matter

Not more than 5%

Total ash

Not more than 14%

Acid-insoluble ash

Not more than 14%

Alcohol-soluble extractive

Not less than 14%

Water-soluble extractive

Not less than 3%

Volatile oil

Not less than 2% v/w

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

88

Method of preparation
(1) Clean the dried fruits of Ajamoda by removing the stalks, dust
and other foreign matters.
(2) Grind in a pulverizer or in a mortar and pestle to make a fine
powder.
(3) Filter through a fine sieve of mesh size 85.
(4) Store in an air-tight container and consume within one year.

Dosage form
Aromatic, slightly bitter yellowish-brown powder giving a sensation
of warmth to the tongue.
Therapeutic properties2
Seeds have antiseptic, diuretic, anti-inflammatory, analgesic,
anthelmintic, and anti-spasmodic properties.
Dose and mode of administration
(1) The dose of the formulation for adults is 1 to 3 grams and for
children 125 to 500 mg, two or three times a day, with warm
water.
(2) For local application as poultice, make a paste of the powdered
seeds in warm water and apply on the affected joint.

Indications and uses
(1) For relief from joint pain in arthritis such as osteoarthritis,
rheumatoid arthritis, gouty arthritis, and non-specific
arthritis.
(2) It is useful in dyspepsia and colic with or without joint pain,
when taken with salt and warm water.
(3) Local application of the paste or poultice of Ajamoda seeds is
recommended in painful joint condition.

Precautions and safety aspects
(1)

Ajamoda powder should not be used during pregnancy
and nursing mothers are advised to take it under medical
supervision.

(2) The diuretic action of Ajamoda works by irritating the kidneys
and therefore should be used with caution in cases of renal
disorder.

89

(3) Where joints are without swelling or inflammation but pain is
dominantly present, massage with warm sesame oil can also
be done following fomentation with Ajamoda seed powder.
(4) Persons having arthritis should avoid eating sour and cold
items.
(5) Excessive use of the affected joints should be avoided.
(6) If pain does not subside within two to three days or joints
develop effusion of fluid, medical advice should be sought.

References
(1)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
Pharmacopoeia of India. Part 1 Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 2.

(2)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB and Dennis TJ. Database on Medicinal Plants
Used in Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda & Siddha, 2001. p. 475.

Further reading
(1)

Sri Brahmasankara Shastri. ed. Yogaratnakara. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Sanskrit Sansthan, 2005.

(2)

Mishra Pd. Sri Brahma Shankara. eds. Bhavaprakasha. Part I. Varanasi:
Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan, 2000.

(3)

Nadkarni KM. Indian materia medica. Vol. I. Mumbai: Popular
Prakashan, 2005.

(4)

Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plants. Varanas: Chaukhambha
Visvabharati, 2004.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

91

16
Lodhra powder for leucorrhoea

Leucorrhoea is a whitish mucous discharge from the female genital
tract. The basic cause of this problem is overproduction of secretions
from the genital tract due to continuous irritation. Mostly there is a
change in the vaginal flora due to change in pH. Vaginal infection is
the most common cause, which usually results from poor hygiene.
Other causes of leucorrhoea are ill health, under-nourishment, marital
disharmony, psychological, and endocrine disturbances, genital tract
inflammation, any growth in the uterus and use of contraceptives.
Leucorrhoea without any underlying pathological condition is seen
in early pregnancy, sexual excitement and at puberty. This type of
leucorrhoea needs no medication but assurance as it may correct
itself though excessive secretions are sometimes enough to keep the
vulva moist and stain the under-clothing.
Differentiation of the underlying causes of leucorrhoea can be
grossly done according to the period of a woman’s life.
(1) Leucorrhoea at an early age, up to puberty usually occurs due
to inflammation of the vagina.
(2) Post-puberty leucorrhoea up to marriage usually occurs from
poor genital hygiene, vaginal infection, ill health and anaemia.
(3) Post-childbirth leucorrhoea occurs mainly due to vaginal or
cervical tear. Leucorrhoea during the childbearing age after the
birth of the first child usually occurs due to cervical erosion
or chronic infective inflammation of the cervix and vagina,
use of contraceptives, excessive vaginal medication or use of
tampons.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

92

(4) Pre-menopausal leucorrhoea results from uterine polyps, fibroid,
carcinoma and prolapse. Post-menopausal leucorrhoea is mainly
the result of genital tract growth, uterine prolapse or senile
changes in the vagina.

Leucorrhoea without severe pathologic conditions can be
successfully managed with a simple remedy such as a powder made
from Lodhra bark and by following certain do’s and don’ts in the
Ayurvedic texts. These are:
(1) Nutritious diet, proper physical activity, mental relaxation,
regular bowel habits and local hygiene are the key to effective
management of leucorrhoea.
(2) Excessive intake of water, unripe fruits, sweet foods and drinks
made of sugar, sedentary lifestyle and indulgence in fear, anger
and grief are the negative factors for leucorrhoea patients and
should be avoided.

Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa Roxb.)
Lodhra powder is a single-ingredient powder made from dried
stem bark of an evergreen tree Symplocos racemosa Roxb., which
is 6 to 8.5 metres tall, found abundantly in the plains and lower
hills throughout India. The bark of Lodhra tree is used orally as
well as for topical application in the form of a vaginal douche. The
formulation is mentioned in classical Ayurvedic texts and in the
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India for use in conditions with increased
discharge like diarrhoea, dysentery, leucorrhoea, excessive menstrual
bleeding, haemorrhagic disorders, conjunctivitis, etc.1. The bark has
astringent, styptic, cooling, anti-inflammatory and anti-microbial
properties and is used in various Ayurvedic formulations meant for
the management of excessive vaginal discharge. Scientific studies
have shown that Lodhra bark has an inhibitory effect on the growth
of Micrococcus pyogenes var. aureus, E. coli, and enteric groups of
microorganisms2.
Composition
The formulation consists of finely powdered stem bark of Symplocos
tree.
English name

Symplocos bark

Latin name

Symplocos racemosa Roxb.

Family

Symplocaceae

Part used

Dried stem bark

93

Leafy shoot with flowers of
Lodhra tree.

Dried stem bark of Lodhra.

Main chemical constituents1
Alkaloids (loturine, loturidine and colloturine) and red colouring matter.
Quality standards3
The bark of Symplocos racemosa Roxb. used for making medicinal
powder should adhere to the following physical constants.
Foreign matter

Nil

Total ash

Not more than 12%

Acid insoluble ash

Not more than 1%

Acid-soluble extractive

Not less than 9%

Water-soluble extractive

Not less than 15%

Method of preparation
(1) Properly dried stem bark of Lodhra is cleaned first to remove
foreign matters and then powdered and sieved through 85 mesh.
Exposure to moisture should be avoided during preparation of
the powder and it should be kept in an air-tight container in
a dry place. Properly kept powder retains its potency for one
year.
(2) For preparing a decoction for vaginal wash, the stem-bark of
Lodhra is cleaned and coarsely powdered. The decoction is
prepared by boiling 20 to 30 grams of coarse powder of Lodhra
bark in 300 to 500 ml of water till 100 to 125 ml remains. The
decoction is filtered and the liquid thus obtained is used warm
for vaginal douche. Fresh decoction should be prepared for the
wash every day.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

94

Dosage form
Grayish-brown powder for oral use and decoction for vaginal wash.
Therapeutic properties4
Lodhra bark has astringent, styptic, anti-inflammatory, and antimicrobial properties.
Dose and mode of administration
(1)

Lodhra powder is given orally in the dose of 3 to 5 gram, twice
a day, with rice water or warm water. Rice water is prepared
by soaking one tablespoon of raw rice in 50 ml plain water for
an hour and then taking out the liquid part. Alternatively, a
mixture of the given dose of powder with the equal amount of
honey can be swallowed with warm water or rice water.

(2) Vaginal wash with the decoction of Lodhra bark should be
done daily for two to three weeks till local symptoms are
adequately controlled. Thereafter, only oral medication should
be continued.
(3) Concomitant use of powder orally and decoction for vaginal
wash helps in speedy and better control of leucorrhoea.

Indications and uses5
(1) Leucorrhoea.
(2) Menorrhagia or metrorrhagia.

Precautions and safety aspects
(1) It is advisable to diagnose the cause of leucorrhoea before
starting treatment with Lodhra.
(2) Overdose and empty-stomach consumption of Lodhra powder
may cause abdominal heaviness, nausea and constipation in
individuals prone to gastro-intestinal upsets. These symptoms
can be avoided by taking light or liquid diet.
(3) Decoction of Lodhra bark for vaginal wash should be prepared
fresh and should not be left uncovered for a long time. It is better
to use the decoction within an hour or so of preparation.
(4) A smaller dose of Lodhra powder may be taken, if menstrual
flow gets diminished.

95

(5) Excessive use of spicy and sour food items, curd and yoghurt
should be avoided during medication.
(6) Mental stress aggravates the symptoms of leucorrhoea and
hence an attempt should be made to remain stress-free, relaxed
and physically active.
(7) If significant control of symptoms is not achieved in three to
four weeks, medical opinion must be sought.
(8) No adverse effect of Lodhra powder is reported when taken in
recommended doses.
(9) It is safe for the baby if a nursing mother is taking this
medication. However, Lodhra powder should not be used for a
long duration during pregnancy.

References
(1)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 83.

(2)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 5. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha, 2002. p. 166.

(3)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 82.

(4)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 5. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2002. p. 164, 166.

(5)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 5. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2002. p. 165.

Further reading
(1)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001.

(2)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 5. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2002.

(3)

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna vijnana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhamba Bharati
Academy, 2001.

(4)

Pandey G.S., ed. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Varanasi: Sri Bhavamishra
Chaukhamba Bharati Academy, 1999.

(5)

Chopra RN, Chopra IC, Varma BS. Supplement to glossary of Indian
medicinal plants. New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate,
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 1992.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

96

(6)

Bhattacharjee SK. Handbook of medicinal plants. Jaipur, Pointer
Publishers, 1998.

(7)

Chopra RN, Chopra Nayar, SL, Chopra IC. Glossary of Indian medicinal
plants. New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate, Council
of Scientific and Industrial Research, 1986.

(8)

Kirtikar KR, Basu BD. India medicinal plants. Vol. II. Allahabad: L.M.
Basu, 1989.

(9)

Kurup PNV, Ramadas VNK, Joshi P. Handbook of medicinal plants. New
Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1979.

(10) Rastogi RP, Mehrotra BN. Compendium of Indian Medicinal Plants. Vol.
III. New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate, Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research, 1993.

97

17
Dhattura paste for lice infestation

Pediculosis is an infestation of the skin, hair or genital region caused
by small insects called lice, which live directly on the body or in
garments. The lice are small wingless parasites with sucking mouth
parts that feed on human blood and lay their eggs on body hairs
or in clothing. Lice infestation itself is not dangerous but a serious
public health problem because some lice can carry microorganisms
that cause diseases like relapsing fever, trench fever and epidemic
typhus.
Lice infestation usually occurs due to poor upkeep and hygiene
of hairy body parts for want of adequate facilities for bathing and
washing of clothes, particularly undergarments. Any individual could
get lice infestation; children with long hair are however more prone
to suffer.
The most common site for lice infestation is the scalp, and it
is transmitted from one person to another by close contact and by
sharing of combs and hair brushes. Head lice infestation in epidemic
form is common in school-going children. Adult lice can be seen on
the patient’s scalp close to the base of hairs and around the ears and
these may spread from the scalp to the eyebrows, eyelashes, and
beard in adults, although they are more often limited to the scalp
in children. Grayish-white eggs called nits may also be visible along
with lice. Nits are premature forms of lice, which take 3 to 14 days to
hatch. Infestations of body lice and pubic lice are seen in individuals
who maintain poor personal hygiene, wear the same clothes and vests
continuously without laundering, do not bathe regularly and share
bedding or clothes or towels with infected persons.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

98

The common symptom of lice infestation irrespective of body
location is itching, usually with injury to the skin caused by scratching
or scraping. The itching may be intense, and may be followed by
bacterial infection of skin that has been scratched open. The itching
results from an allergic reaction to a toxin that is present in the
saliva of the lice. Diffuse skin eruption or inflammation can result
with repeated bites of lice.
Another common complication in head lice infestation is swelling
or inflammation of the neck glands. Patients with body lice often have
intense itching with deep scratches around the folds of shoulders,
flanks or neck. The bites first appear as small red pimples but may
cause a generalized skin rash. If the infestation is not treated, the
patient may develop complications that include headache, fever, and
bacterial infection with scarring. Pubic lice may sometimes produce
small bluish spots on the patient’s trunk or thighs.
Prevention of lice infestation and re-infestation is tedious
requiring avoidance of close contacts with infected persons, sharing
of garments, towels, etc. and maintenance of adequate body hygiene
is more important than the treatment. Local application of the paste
of certain medicinal plants and medicated oils is in practice in India
for the treatment of lice infestation.
Some commonly used formulations are documented in the
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia and Ayurvedic Formulary of India. Dhattura
paste is one such formulation that is widely used in rural areas
because of its effectiveness in killing lice.

Dhattura (Datura metel Linn.)
Dhattura is a popular medicinal plant of India documented for its
anti-lice efficacy in the classical Ayurvedic literature. Bhavamishra1
describes the use of Dhattura seeds for the treatment of Yuka
(lice) and Liksha (nits). The plant is enlisted in the Ayurvedic
Pharmacopoeia of India2 providing pharmacopoeial standards and
uses of the whole plant and seeds.
Dhattura plant grows as a weed throughout India. The plant is an
erect and succulent annual herb or shrub about one metre in height
with often purplish branches and triangular ovate leaves, bell-shaped
flowers having purplish colour outside and white inside and round,
thorny fruits. Dhattura seeds are light brown to yellowish brown in
colour, odourless, kidney shaped, about 0.6 centimetre in length
and 0.4 centimetre in width, compressed, flattened and thickened
towards the curved edge with a bitter and acrid taste.

99

Composition
The paste for application over lice-infested parts consists of Dhattura
seeds.
English name

Thorn apple

Latin name

Datura metel Linn.

Family

Solanaceae

Part used

Leaf and seeds

Cut-opened fruit
of Dhattura.

Leafy shoot of Dhattura with flower and
thorny fruit.

Dry seeds of Dhattura.

Main chemical constituents3
Tropane alkaloids such as hyoscyamine, atropine, scopolamine, etc.
and fixed oil.
Quality standards3
Quality of Dhattura is estimated on the basis of the following physical
constants.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

100

Foreign matter

Not more than 2%

Total ash

Not more than 6%

Acid insoluble ash

Not more than 1%

Acid-soluble extractive

Not less than 5%

Water-soluble extractive

Not less than 7%

Method of preparation
(1) Fresh mature leaves of Dhattura are plucked and ground in
a mortar or grinder with a little water. The juice is expressed
from the ground leaves for application the same day.
(2) For making a paste, dry seeds are first finely powdered and
then mixed properly with an equal amount of water or mustard
oil.
(3) Adding mustard oil to the leaf juice or seed powder enhances
the anti-lice effect of Dhattura.
(4) The body-part, where juice or paste of Dhattura is to be applied
should not be wet and it is better to use the medicament at
night to derive optimal effect.

Dosage form
Greenish juice of leaves and yellowish-brown oily powder of seeds.
Therapeutic properties4
Dhattura is known to have strong nematicidal, analgesic, anti-viral,
anthelmintic and anti-spasmodic properties by virtue of which it is
useful in treating lice infestation and associated symptoms.
Dose and mode of administration
(1) The amount of leaf juice or seed powder required for application
depends upon the size of the affected area. Usually 25 to 30
millilitres of leaf juice or paste of seeds, 5 to 10 grams, made
with 15 to 20 millilitres of water or mustard oil is required for
a single application on the scalp. The paste of powdered seeds
is preferred over leaf juice in case lice infestation is confined
to the head.
(2) Fresh juice of Dhattura leaves or paste of seeds is to be applied
uniformly over the affected area with hands and left for at
least three to four hours and then washed with plain water.

101

The juice or paste should be applied against the direction of
hairs to provide maximum exposure to the insects. The longer
the medicine remains in contact with the body, the better
the results seen. Due care must be taken to ensure that the
medicine is applied close to the base of the hair on the scalp
and other parts of the body.
(3) Washing the hair with shampoo before or after applying
the medicine should be avoided as it dilutes the medicine’s
effectiveness.
(4) Dead lice or nits should be removed manually or with a comb
after the paste or juice has dried.
(5) Application of Dhattura leaf juice or paste of seed powder
should be done consecutively for three to five days till all lice
and nits are killed and removed. Further hair wash should be
done at least two days after the completion of the course of
treatment.

Indications and uses
Lice infestation with or without nits in the head, pubic and other
regions of the body and associated symptoms of itching and skin
rash is the main indication for the use of Dhattura paste or juice on
affected parts.
Precautions and safety aspects
It is important to observe the following precautions:
(1)

Dhattura is a poisonous medicinal plant and hence it should
be used with care.

(2) While applying or removing leaf juice or seed paste of Dhattura,
due care must be taken that the medicine does not get into
the eyes, mouth, ear, nose and other natural openings of the
human body.
(3) Remove the dead or partially inactivated lice with a narrowtooth comb or manually.
(4) Mixing Dhattura medication with other drugs with similar action
is not desirable as drug to drug interaction is unknown.
(5) The most important step in treating head lice infestation is
to treat the person and other family members simultaneously
with medication to kill the lice and prevent re-infestation and
cross-infection.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

102

(6) Wash clothes and bedsheets used by the infested person two
days before the treatment is started.
(7) The lice-infested person should wear clean clothing after each
application of Dhattura medication.
(8) In case a few live lice are found after two to three applications
of medicine, but are moving more slowly than before, there
is no need for further treatment. Comb the hair to remove
such lice and wait for a day or two for the medicine to kill the
remaining lice on the head.
(9) Whereas no dead lice are seen and lice are as active as before,
the medicine may not be working. In such a situation seek
medical opinion and follow doctor’s advice.
(10) After a course of 2-3 days treatment, check the hair bases and
comb hair with a nit-comb to remove nits and lice on alternate
days. Continue to check for 2 to 3 weeks until it is assured
that all lice and nits are killed and removed.
(11) To kill lice and nits present in the clothing and bed linen that
was used during two days before treatment, wash them using
hot water with not less than 130°F temperature or dry laundry
using high heat for at least 20 minutes. Similarly, combs and
hair brushes should be dipped in hot water and washed with
soap.
(12) Clothes such as coat, scarf, cap, etc. should be dry cleaned.
(13) In order to prevent re-infestation, all such activities should
be avoided that are likely to spread lice such as head-to-head
contact during play and at home; sharing of clothes and towels,
hair brushes and combs; and lying on beds, sofas, couches,
pillows, carpets, or stuffed animals that have recently been in
contact with an infested person.

References
(1)

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Edited by Dr GS Pandey.
Varanasi: Chaukhamba Bharati Academy, 1999. p. 317-320.

(2)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 43-44.

(3)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 44.

(4)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used
in Ayurveda. Vol. 2. p New Delhi: Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda & Siddha, 2001. 203.

103

Further reading
(1)

U. S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Division of Parasitic Diseases. Web site http://
www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dpd/index.htm (accessed 21 February 2010).

(2)

Kurup PNV, Ramadas VNK, Joshi P. Handbook of medicinal plants. New
Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1979.

(3)

Nadkarni AK. Dr K.M. Nadkarni’s Indian materia medica. Vol. I. Bombay:
Popular Book Depot, 1976.

(4)

Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plants. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Visvabharati, 1996.

(5)

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna vijnana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhamba Bharati
Academy, 2001.

(6)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. IV. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2004.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

105

18
Ashvagandha powder for malaise

Malaise is a symptom of psychosomatic origin characterized by a
general feeling of illness or lack of well-being and may be accompanied
by discomfort, fatigue, lassitude, restlessness, loss of strength and
lack of interest and drive. This symptom is usually a vague sense of
ill-being and exhaustion seen in patients suffering from any significant
febrile infection and metabolic or chronic disease.
The mechanism of development of malaise is not fully understood
and probably it may result from excessive presence of reactive
molecules called free radicals. These molecules cause oxidant injury
to the body cells and inadequate supply of antioxidants in the diet
lead to a decline in the levels of antioxidants with increasing age.
The onset of malaise may be sudden or staggering depending upon
the nature of the underlying disease.
Malaise associated with other symptoms indicates significant
illness. The following is the list of conditions that mostly cause
malaise:
(1) Acute infectious diseases like pneumonia, influenza, and viral
fever.
(2) Chronic infectious diseases like AIDS, parasitic disease, hepatitis
and tuberculosis.
(3) Organ-specific chronic diseases like heart failure, obstructive
lung disease, kidney failure and liver disease.
(4) Autoimmune diseases like rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis, and
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

106

(5) Endocrinal disorders like diabetes mellitus, dysfunction of the
thyroid and adrenal glands.
(6) Various cancers like leukaemia, lymphoma, colon cancer and
solid malignant tumours.
(7) Severe anaemia.
(8) Mental illness such as depression.
(9) Medication with anti-convulsant, anti-histaminic, psychotropic
and beta-blocker drugs and multi-drug treatments.

Certain herbal medicines called Rasayana in Ayurveda are proven
to have excellent anti-oxidant, immune-enhancer, anti-infective,
anti-degenerative and anti-stress effects. Ashvagandha is one such
medicinal herb, which helps in many ways in the restoration and
maintenance of health and vitality and to reinforce the psychosomatic
mechanisms involved in preventing and treating malaise of varied
origin.

Ashvagandha Powder (Withania somnifera Dunal.)
Ashvagandha is a perennial shrub, found in waste lands, cultivated
fields and open grounds throughout India. It is widely cultivated
in India. The roots are collected in winter, washed and cut into
short pieces. Ashvagandha is one of the most commonly used
medicinal plants in Indian medicine for a varied range of physical
and psychological ailments. It finds mention in almost all classical
compendia of Indian medicine, particularly in the context of
rejuvenation therapy. The plant is best known for its tonic, antistress and vigour- and vitality-enhancing properties. The root of
the plant is used as such in powder form or in combination with
other medicinal plants in various kinds of formulations mentioned
in official formularies and pharmacopoeia of India. A lot of scientific
work has been done on Ashvagandha proving it to be useful as an
immunomodulator, antioxidant and adaptogenic1. Due to these very
beneficial effects, Ashvagandha is preferred for adjuvant use in the
management of various psychosomatic, infectious and drug-induced
ailments and nutritional deficiency states with malaise as a main
symptom. Ashvagandha improves tissue vitality, physical and mental
endurance and neuromuscular strength.

107

Composition
Ashvagandha powder consists of dried mature roots of Withania
somnifera Dunal.
English name

Winter cherry

Latin name

Withania somnifera Dunal.

Family

Solanaceae

Parts used

Root

Ashvagandha plant with unripe and
ripe fruits.

Dry Ashvagandha roots.

Main chemical constituents2
Alkaloids and withanolides.
Quality standards3
Identity, purity and strength of Ashvagandha root are determined
on the following basis:
Foreign matter

Not more than 2%

Total ash

Not more than 7%

Acid-insoluble ash

Not more than 1%

Alcohol-soluble extractive

Not less than 15%

Assay of total alkaloids

Not less than 0.2%

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

108

Method of preparation
(1) Dried roots of Ashvagandha are cleaned and ground into fine
powder.
(2) The powder is filtered through mesh size 85 to remove fibers
and coarse particles and then kept in an airtight jar or polythene
bag away from moisture.
(3) The potency of well-preserved Ashvagandha powder is retained
for one year.

Dosage form
Cream-coloured fine powder.
Therapeutic properties4
(1)

Ashvagandha is a tonic, anti-stress, adaptogenic, somniferous,
stimulant, vitalizer, aphrodisiac and immuno-enhancer.

(2) Pharmacological studies have confirmed its immuno-modulatory,
cyto-protective, anti-oxidant and anti-ageing properties.

Dose and mode of administration
(1) The dose for adults of Ashvgandha powder is three to six grams
and for children the dose is 500 mg to 1g to be taken twice a
day, with honey or warm milk before meals. It is advisable to
first mix Ashvagandha powder properly with an equal amount
of honey and the mixture to be swallowed with sips of milk.
(2) Alternatively, boil a single dose of Ashvagandha powder in four
times milk and eight times water till milk remains. If needed,
add sugar to the medicated milk and drink it lukewarm. Every
dose of Ashvagandha powder has to be freshly boiled with milk
and water.

Indications and uses
Ashvagandha powder is useful in malaise, debility, impotence,
neurasthenia, mental stress and fatigue.
Precautions and safety aspects
(1) Malaise persisting for more than a week must be properly
investigated and the underlying cause should be ascertained
before starting Ashvagandha.

109

(2) Concomitant use of alcohol and psychotropic drugs should
preferably be avoided while using Ashvagandha powder.
(3) Individuals with hot constitution should take a smaller dose of
Ashvagandha and should avoid excessive consumption of hot
beverages, sour, spicy and stimulant foods.
(4)

Ashvagandha powder is generally considered as safe. Used in
a dose of up to 9 grams per day for four weeks, it is reported
to be well-tolerated.

(5) Larger doses of Ashvagandha may possess abortifacient
property and thus contraindicated during pregnancy. Even
normal dose should be given to pregnant women under medical
supervision.
(6) It is safe for the baby if a nursing mother is taking
Ashvagandha.

References
(1)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2001. p. 91-92.

(2)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol.1. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 16.

(3)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part1 Vol.1. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p 15.

(4)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2001. p. 89, 91-92.

Further reading
(1)

Chopra RN, Nayar SL, Chopra IC. Glossary of Indian medicinal plants.
New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate, Council of Science
and Industrial Research, 1986.

(2)

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1982.

(3)

Indian herbal pharmacopoeia: a joint publication of Regional Research
Laboratory, Jammu Tawi. Vol. I. Mumbai: Indian Drug Manufacturers’
Association, 1998.

(4)

Warrier, PK et al. Eds. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. V. Madras: Orient
Longman Ltd., 1997.

(5)

Khare CP. Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi: India Springer (India)
Pvt. Ltd., 2007.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

110

(6)

Kirtikar KR, Basu BD. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. 3. Allahabad: LM
Basu, 1988.

(7)

Panda S, Kar A. Evidence for free radical scavenging activity of
Ashvagandha root powder in mice. Indian J. Physiol. Pharmacol.
41(4), 1997.

(8)

Puri HS. Rasayana: Ayurvedic herbs for longevity and rejuvenation.
London: Taylor & Francis. 2003.

(9)

Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plants. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Visvabharati,1996.

(10) Shastri AD. Bhaishajyaratnavali. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit
Sansthana, 1981.
(11) Singh RH, et al. Depressive illness: a therapeutic evaluation with herbal
drugs. J. Res. Edu. Ayur. Siddha. 11, 1990.

111

19
Shatpushpa powder for painful menstruation

Painful menstruation, also known as dysmenorrhoea, is a common
problem of women in the reproductive age group. There are several
causes attributed to this condition; such as congenital malformation
of the genital tract, mechanical obstruction, infection, vascular
congestion and sometimes psychogenic causes. The nature, severity
and time of pain vary from individual to individual depending on the
underlying cause, tolerance capacity and the individual’s perception
of the condition.
Pain may occur before, during and after menstrual flow.
Sometimes, it may occur between the menstrual periods. The pain
can be dull and continuous with a sense of heaviness in the pelvic
region and not infrequently intermittent and spasmodic. Anxiety, stress
and unsatisfied sexual stimulation contribute significantly to induce
or aggravate dysmenorrhoea without any structural or pathologic
cause.
Primary dysmenorrhoea is present from the time of menarche,
i.e. from the onset of menstruation and is also termed as congenital
or essential, while secondary dysmenorrhoea results from congestive,
inflammatory, obstructive and functional conditions of the genital
tract.
Painful menstruation without pathologic conditions can be
successfully managed with simple remedies such as powder of
Shatpushpa and observing certain do’s and don’ts:
(1) Food intake around menstual period should be light, soft and
easy to digest. Heavy meals, overeating and dry, spicy, and cold
foods should be avoided. If the appetite is weak, switch over to
liquid or semi-solid diet.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

112

(2) Women should maintain a relaxed state of mind before and
during menstrual days keeping away aggression, anger,
frustration and irritation. Proper sleep and deep breathing with
relaxed mind help to improve tolerance and alleviate pain.
(3) Suppression of defecation and urination urges should be
avoided.
(4) Sipping of warm water and hot water fomentation over lower
abdomen give relief from pain.
(5) Excessive physical or mental exertion, dietary irregularities
and mental irritation should be avoided and due care should
be taken to have proper meals and rest.

Shatpushpa (Anethum sowa Roxb. ex Flem.)
Tribal communities use dried ripe fruits of Shatpushpa in the
form of a decoction or powder or boiled with milk alone or mixed
with other herbs for female health problems resulting during
menstruation and after child birth. The formulation is listed with
given indications in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India1. The
plant is cultivated in tropical and subtropical regions and its fruits
are collected near the end of winter, dried in the shade and kept in
dry conditions. Properly preserved fruits are dark brown and rich
in essential oil with a faintly aromatic odour, warm and slightly
sharp taste resembling that of caraway. Optimal potency of the
herb and its powder lasts for about one year.
Composition
The formulation consists of powdered dry fruits of Shatpushpa.
English name

Dill

Latin name

Anethum sowa Roxb. ex Flem.

Family

Apiaceae

Part used

Dried ripe fruits

113

Unripe Shatpushpa fruits.

Flowering Shatpushpa plant.

Dried, ripe Shatpushpa fruits.

Main chemical constituents2
Essential oil, aromatic glycosides, monoterpenoid, ketodiols.
Quality standards3
Foreign matter

Not more than 5%

Total ash

Not more than 14%

Acid-insoluble ash

Not more than 1.5%

Alcohol-soluble extractive

Not less than 4%

Water-soluble extractive

Not less than 15%

Volatile oil

Not less than 3%

Method of preparation
(1) Clean Shatpushpa dried fruits by removing dust and other
foreign particles.
(2) Grind fruits in a dry grinder or pulverizer.
(3) Filter the powder through sieve with mesh size 85.
(4) Store the powder in an air-tight glass or food-grade plastic
container and store in a dry, cool place away from direct
sunlight.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

114

(5) Soft decoction or infusion is prepared by boiling 2 to 3 grams
of Shatpushpa in 50 ml of water until half of it remains. Or,
soak Shatpushpa fruits in 25 to 30 ml of hot water for half an
hour and then filter the contents to obtain infusion.

Dosage form
Brownish powder and decoction is light brown liquid.
Therapeutic properties4
The preparation has anti-spasmodic, stomachic, carminative, antiflatulent and emmenagogue properties.
Dose and mode of administration
Two to three grams of the powder is to be taken twice a day with
warm water, preferably after meals. The powder can be mixed with
an equal amount of honey and swallowed with warm water or milk.
Or, 25 to 30 ml of decoction or infusion can be taken twice or thrice
daily. For continous pain or heaviness use of 2-3 teaspoonsful (1015 ml) infusion is recommended at hourly intervals.
Indications and uses
(1) Painful menstruation with or without abdominal symptoms.
(2)

Shatpushpa is also indicated for improving menstrual flow and
lactation after delivery.

(3) It is also used as a household remedy for first-hand management
of common ailments like diarrhoea, flatulence, indigestion, acute
abdominal pain and fever5.

Precautions and safety aspects
(1) Hot (pungent) spicy and sour food items should be avoided
during menstruation and medication with Shatpushpa powder.
In summer either the dose of Shatpushpa should be reduced or
should be taken with some cooling, soft and soothing liquid.
(2) Use of Shatpushpa may be discontinued if menstrual blood flow
increases and symptoms of giddiness, heat, burning, excessive
thirst and dryness appear. These symptoms usually appear in
women with hot body-mind constitution, i.e. Paittik constitution
and can be negated by consuming soft, lubricating, soothing,
semisolid and juicy food items.

115

(3) Toxic or adverse effects of Shatpushpa are not reported in the
literature.
(4) Deep-fried, oily foods that may cause abdominal heaviness,
indigestion and constipation, etc. should be avoided.
(5) Cold water bath, dry massage, night awakening, irregularity in
sleep, excessive walking, excessive coitus, strenuous exertion
and mental stress, etc. should be avoided.

References
(1)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. II. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 1999. p. 153-154.

(2)

Lavekar GS et al. Database on medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. Vol.
8. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha,
2007. p. 360.

(3)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. II. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 1999. p. 154.

(4)

Lavekar GS et al. Database on medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. Vol.
8. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha,
2007. p. 357.

(5)

Bhavamishra. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Edited by Dr G.S. Pandey.
Varanasi: Chaukhamba Bharati Academy, 1999. p. 35-36.

Further reading
(1)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. II. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 1999.

(2)

Khare CP. Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi: Springer (India) Pvt.
Ltd., 2007.

(3)

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna vijnana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhamba Bharati
Academy, 2001.

(4)

National Academy of Ayurveda. Medicinal plants used in Ayurveda.
New Delhi: INAA, 1998.

(5)

Bhavamishra. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Edited by Dr GS Pandey.
Varanasi: Chaukhamba Bharati Academy, 1999.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

117

20
Palasha powder for parasitic infestation

Parasites are organisms that live on or inside humans or other
organisms from which they obtain nutrients to survive. There can be
many different types of parasite worms living in human bodies. Some
are microscopic while others can be seen quite easily. These parasites
or their eggs can be found in the environment, in the air we breathe,
in the water we drink, or in the food we eat. These parasites may be
pathogenic or non-pathogenic.
Pathogenic parasites cause harm because they consume the
nutrient of the host, invade body tissues and cells, and produce toxic
waste, which makes people sick. Moreover, most parasites also require
a host to complete their life cycle. One third of the world’s population
is infected with one or more species of intestinal parasites – easy
victims being children. These infections impair children’s growth and
development. Studies have shown an association between parasitic
infection and under-nutrition, iron deficiency anaemia, stunted growth,
poor school attendance and poor performance in cognition tests.
Modes of transmission
People can become infested by intestinal parasites through:
(1) Walking barefoot on soil contaminated with faeces of humans,
dogs, cats, etc.
(2) Eating raw or undercooked pork, beef or fish that are
infected.
(3) Eating contaminated raw food, fruits and vegetables.
(4) Eating food prepared by infected handlers.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

118

(5) Drinking contaminated water.
(6) Poor hygiene or sanitation.
(7) Contact with infected persons (sexual contact, kissing, sharing
drinks, shaking hands, or sharing toys).
(8) Inhaling dust that contains parasitic eggs or cysts.
(9) Playing with or picking up pet litter contaminated with parasitic
eggs or cysts.

Portal of entry into the body
In the case of internal parasites, the most common portal of invasion
is through the mouth. This is the entrance for the intestinal protozoa
and helminths such as round warm, pin worm, etc. in the fully
embryonated egg stage. A few important infestations, viz. species of
hookworms, strongyloides and dog tape worm enter the body from
the soil via the skin route.
The symptoms and signs of intestinal parasitic infestation can
be variable and include: dyspepsia, diarrhoea, weight loss, fatigue,
abdominal cramping and pain, constipation, nausea, vomiting, loss
of appetite, irritable bowel syndrome, anaemia, joint and muscle
aches, fever, rash, frequent colds and influenza, cough, itching anus,
blood and/or mucus in the stools or foul smelling stools and visible
worms in the stools, itching on the genitals and grinding of teeth in
sleep. Sometimes these parasitic infestations can be life-threatening
in people with severe impairment of immune function.
Intestinal parasitic infestation
The most common intestinal parasites to infect humans are:
(1) Protozoa: Giardia intestinalis (Giardia lamblia), Entamoeba
histolytica, cryptosporidium species, etc.
(2) Intestinal helminths: roundworm, hookworm, pinworm,
threadworm, whipworm, and tapeworm.

These parasitic infestations, particularly roundworm, threadworm
and giardia can be treated with a single herbal drug named Palasha
beeja powder along with maintenance of hygiene and following
certain do’s and don’ts:

119

(i)

Persons suffering from worm infestation should avoid excess
intake of sweet and sour foods, milk, leafy vegetables, and
non-vegetarian diet.

(ii)

Suppression of natural urges of vomiting, passing stools and
day-sleeping should be avoided.

(iii) Foods made up of bitter, pungent and astringent items, honey,
alcoholic beverages, garlic, chenopodium leaves, sesame oil
and mustard oil are beneficial.
(iv) Keeping digestive fire proper is essentially required to prevent
the development of intestinal medium favourable for parasites
and worms, for which healthy eating habits and timely meals
are important.

Palasha [Butea monosperma (Lam.) Kuntze]

Palasha is a deciduous, medium-sized tree with somewhat crooked
trunk and irregular branches, found in the dry deciduous forests,
open grasslands and scrub forests of tropical zones. Its mature
fruits are collected before the rains commence, either from the
tree or off the ground, dried in the shade and kept dry. Properly
preserved seeds are flat, kidney-shaped, dark reddish brown, thin,
glossy; and rich in fixed oil with a faint odour and slightly acrid and
bitter taste. Optimal potency of the seed and its powder lasts for
about four months. It is used as a remedy for common ailments
like worm infestation, skin diseases, etc. The formulation is listed
with given indications in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India1.
Tribal communities make use of fresh or dried seeds of Palasha
in the form of a decoction or powder and mixed with other herbs
for the management of parasitic worm infestation2.
Composition
The formulation consists of dried powdered seeds of Palasha.
English name

Flame of forest, Bengal kino tree,
Bastard teak

Latin name

Butea monosperma Lam. Kuntze.

Family

Fabaceae

Parts used

Seeds

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

120

Palasha flowers.

Pods of Palasha.

Palasha tree in bloom.

Palasha seed.

Main chemical constituents3
Fixed oil (yellow, tasteless), enzymes (proteolytic and lypolytic)
and small quantities of resins and alkaloids, glucose, butrin, and
palasonin.

Quality standards4
The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia of India provides quality standards of
Palasha seeds based on the following physical constants:
Foreign matter

Not more than 1%

Total ash

Not more than 7%

Acid-insoluble ash

Not more than 0.5%

Alcohol-soluble extractives

Not less than 9%

Water-soluble extractive

Not less than 25%

Hexane soluble extractive

Not less than 15 %

Method of preparation
(1) Clean the dried seeds of Palasha, and grind them in grinder
or pulverizer.

121

(2) Filter the powder through sieve mesh size 85.
(3) Keep the powder in an air-tight, dry container of glass or foodgrade plastic and store in a dry, cool place away from direct
sunlight.
(4) It is always good to use fresh Palasha seed powder for better
results. However, it can be used up to four months after
preparation.

Dosage form
Yellowish-brown powder.

Therapeutic properties3
Palasha seeds have anthelmintic, purgative, rubefacient and tonic
properties.

Dose and mode of administration
The dose for adults is 2 to 3 grams twice a day. Children may be
given 500 mg to 1 gram of the drug twice a day. This dosage form
may be given on an empty stomach for 5 to 7 days continuously with
honey or jaggery, rice water, butter-milk or warm water. It may also
be given in a single dose up to a maximum of six grams in adults
and three grams to children on an empty stomach.

Indications and uses
The Palasha seeds are internally administered as anthelmintic5, 6 mainly
for roundworm7 and threadworm8, 9 and also for giardiasis10.

Precautions and safety aspects
(1) No side or toxic effects are reported in literature with
recommended dose of Palasha seed.
(2) Women desirous to conceive and pregnant women should not
use this drug.
(3) As Palasha seed powder is bitter, astringent and hot in potency,
large doses should be avoided. Large doses may cause nausea,
vomiting and abdominal colic.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

122

(4) A high dose can occasionally cause nephrotoxicity and anaemia.
Liver, lungs and spleen congestion can also occur with a very
high dose.
(5) The seed suspension has shown teratogenic effects in rats5;
therefore in pregnant women it should not be used. However,
short term use of this medication may be safe for the baby if
a nursing mother is taking it.

The following measures can help prevent parasitic infestation:
(1) Washing hands before eating and after using the toilet.
(2) Wearing gloves when gardening or working with soil or sand
because soil can be contaminated with eggs or cysts of
parasites.
(3) Do not allow children to be licked or kissed by pets that are
not de-wormed regularly.
(4) Wash fresh vegetables and fruits thoroughly.
(5) Avoid eating raw meat, which may contain Giardia lamblia.
(6) Very sweet food items should not be taken in excess and
regularly.

References
(1)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. IV. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 82-83.

(2)

Joshi P. Herbal drugs used in guinea worm disease by tribals of
Southern Rajasthan (India). International Journal of Pharmacognosy.
1991; 29(1): 33-38.

(3)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 1. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2001. p. 338.

(4)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. IV. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 83.

(5)

Prashant D, Asha MK, Amit A, Padmaja R. Short report: anthelmintic
activity of butea monosperma. Fitoterapia. 2001; 72(4): 421-422.

(6)

Jain JP, Nauvi SMA. A clinical trial of palasha (butea monosperma
(Lam.) Kuntze. Syn. B. Frondosa Koen. ex Roxb.) in worm infestations
(Krimi Roga). J. Res. Ay. Sid. 1986; 7(1-2): 13-22.

(7)

Sharma BP, Ojha D. The management of Gandupada Krimi Ascaris
lumbricoides with indigenous drugs. Aryavaidyan, 1992; Vol.5 (3):
170-2.

(8)

Dixit SK, Lalit OD. Hymenolepis in childhood and its treatment by
indigenous drugs. Indian J. Med. Res. 1970; 58: 616-21.

123

(9)

Agarwal AK et al. Management of giardiasis by an immuno-modulatory
herbal drug Pippali Rasayana, 1. Ethnopharmacology. 1994; 1.44 (3):
143-16.

(10) Kaleysaraj R, Kurup PA. Anthelmintic activity, toxicity & other
pharmacological properties of Panasonin, the active principle of Butea
frondosa seeds & its piperazine salt. Indian J. Med. Res. 1968; 56(12):
1818-25.

Further reading
(1)

Indian Council of Medical Research. Medicinal plants of India. Vol. I.
New Delhi: 1976.

(2)

The wealth of India - raw materials. New Delhi: Publications and
Information Directorate, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research,
1982.

(3)

Chunekar K.C. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1982.

(4)

Jawaharlal SC, Sabir M. Modified method for isolation of palasonin the anthelmintic principle of Butea frondosa seeds. Indian J. Pharma.
Sciences. 40, 1978.

(5)

Sharma PV. Drayagunvijnana. Vol. lI. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Bharati
Academy, 1981.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

125

21
Surana powder for piles (haemorrhoids)

Piles (haemorrhoids) are dilated veins within the anal canal. The
precipitating causes of haemorrhoidal disease are chronic constipation,
strain during defecation, sedentary life, pregnancy, chronic liver
disease and abnormal bowel habits due to long-term use of low-fibre
and fat-rich diet.
Piles may be internal, that is, above the internal anal sphincter or
external, that is, below the sphincter; dry or with bleeding. The main
and earliest symptom of piles is painless bleeding which is usually
after and some times before defecation. Pain is not characteristic of
haemorrhoids unless it is associated with infection, thrombosis or
fissure-in-ano. Mucus discharge is a particular symptom of prolapsed
haemorrhoids and anal itching may follow the discharge. Anaemia is
seen in long-standing cases due to persistent and profuse bleeding.
Though piles are the most common cause of painless rectal
bleeding, it is important that rectal and anal cancer must be excluded
by proper physical examination and investigation before the condition
is treated as piles.
In Ayurveda, various drugs are mentioned to treat piles. Of these,
Surana powder is a simple herbal medicine which is frequently used
for treating piles following certain life-style changes. The following
do’s & don’ts are to be observed by patients with haemorrhoids:
(1) Avoid heavy foods, untimely meals and food items that cause
constipation and indigestion.
(2) Old rice, barley, garlic, black pepper, lemon, gooseberry, and
ginger and judicious use of medicinal beverages are beneficial
in the patients with piles.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

126

(3) Regular use of goat’s milk and yoghurt is beneficial.
(4) Avoid overeating and dry and spicy foods.

Surana [Amorphophallus campanulatus (Roxb.)
Blume.]
Surana powder is a simple formulation made from dried corm of
Amorphophallus campanulatus, a stout, herbaceous plant cultivated
throughout the plains of India. This medicinal plant is named so
owing to its ability to combat diseases like piles. Surana is mentioned
in Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia1 as well as the Ayurvedic Formulary of
India2. Its daily use is considered beneficial in relieving piles.
Composition
Surana powder consists of finely powdered dried corm of Surana
for oral use.
English name

Elephant foot

Latin name

Amorphophallus campanulatus (Roxb.) Blume.

Family

Araceae

Part used

Corm or rhizome

Unripe corm with roots.

Full Surana plant.

Mature corm.

127

Main chemical constituents3
Betulinic acid, beta-sitosterol, stigmasterol, lupeol, glucose, galactose,
rhamnose and xylose.
Quality standards3
Identity, purity and potency of Surana corm for its oral use are
estimated on the basis of the following physical constants.
Foreign matter

Not more than 1%

Total ash

Not more than 8%

Acid-insoluble ash

Not more than 2%

Alcohol-soluble extractives

Not less than 3%

Water-soluble extractives

Not less than 9%

Method of preparation
(1) Cut Surana corm into small pieces and dry them in sunlight

or oven.
(2) Take 50 grams of dried pieces of Surana. Dry them further to
remove moisture for easy powdering.
(3) Grind the corms in a grinder or pulverizer till fine powder is
obtained.
(4) Filter the powder through 85 size mesh to remove coarse fibers
and other particles.
(5) Keep the powder in a dry and air-tight food-grade plastic or
glass container.

Dosage form
Creamish-grey fine powder.
Therapeutic properties4
Surana has carminative, appetizing, digestive and analgesic
properties.
Dose and mode of administration
The dose of Surana powder for adults is 2 to 10 grams and for
children 1 to 5 grams, twice daily to be swallowed with water.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

128

Indications and uses
Surana is useful in piles, liver disorders, abdominal pain and
constipation.
Precautions and safety aspects
(1) Raw Surana corm may cause itching which can be relieved by
its antidotes such as lemon and tamarind taken orally.
(2) Hot, spicy, fried, sour, pungent, fat-rich and heavy foods should
be avoided during medication with Surana.
(3) The patient should take plenty of water, properly cooked green
vegetables, fruits and milk in daily diet.
(4) Straining during defecation should always be avoided.
(5) Diet should be soft and digestible and not causing constipation.
(6) It is not advisable for pregnant and nursing mothers to consume
Surana.

References
(1)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. III. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 205-206.

(2)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Part II. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
and Homeopathy, 2000. p. 341.

(3)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 206.

(4)

Lavekar GS et al. Database on medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. Vol.
VIII. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Siddha,
2007. p. 401.

Further reading
(1)

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1982.

(2)

Warrier PK et. al. Ed. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. I. Madras: Orient
Longman Ltd., 1994.

(3)

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna Vijnana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhamba
Sanskrit Bharati Academy, 1978,

(4)

Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plants. Varanasi: Chaukhamba
Vishvabharati and Orient Publishers and Distributors, 1996.

129

22
Gandhaka ointment for scabies

Scabies is a contagious skin disease caused by infestation with itch
mite (Sarcoptes scabiei). It spreads by skin-to-skin contact with a
person who carries the mite. Less commonly, scabies can spread
through sharing of clothes and bedding. Scabies is most common
among household members and sexual partners of affected individuals.
It is also common in congested areas such as hostels, dormitories,
army camps, prisons, nursing homes and hospitals. In people with
compromised immune systems and malnutrition, scabies can be
an extensive disease of skin thickening and a scaly rash; and the
syndrome called crusted scabies or Norwegian scabies.
The scabies mite cannot live more than three days without a
human host, but it can survive up to a month when living on a human
being and lays eggs on human skin, which hatch and grow into adult
mites. The initial phase of infestation is asymptomatic. Subsequently,
the disease manifests with intense itching especially at night or while
taking a hot water bath. The itching is due to allergic reaction to the
mites and their excreta or deposit in skin burrows. The skin lesion
includes red rashes and raised spots. Due to scratching the skin may
become crusty or scaly as the infection progresses. Early scabies
rash may show little red bumps like hives, pimples and tiny bites.
Scabies usually begins in the body’s folds and crevices such as arm
pits, around the nipples of women, on the penis of men, belt line,
between the fingers, buttocks, elbows, inner thighs, wrist, and skin
under rings, bracelets or watch bands. Except in infants and small
children; the face, scalp, neck, palm and scalp are usually spared.
The child may also have irritability, sleeplessness and tiredness due
to itching. Secondary bacterial infection may occur over the scabies
lesions and in many cases children are treated because of infected

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

130

skin lesions rather than for the scabies itself. Secondary skin
infection with Streptococcus bacteria can sometimes lead to acute
glomerulonephritis which is a serious complication of scabies.
Curing scabies needs several precautions and effort. A local
application made from Gandhaka described in classical texts
of Ayurveda can check the infection and reduce the spread of
scabies.

Gandhaka ointment (ointment of sulphur)
Gandhaka ointment is an effective preparation made form Gandhaka
(sulphur), Tila oil (sesame oil) and Siktha (bee wax). Both internal
and external use of purified Gandhaka is mentioned in Ayurvedic
classics as well as the Ayurvedic Formulary of India1. External use of
sulphur possesses parasiticidal and fungicidal property attributed to
the formation of hydrogen sulphide and pentatonic acid2. Tila consists
of dried seeds of Sesamum indicum Linn. a herb extensively cultivated
throughout the plains of India. Tila oil extracted from sesame seeds
is used in skin diseases such as erysipelas, vitiligo, haemorrhoids,
gout, gonorrhea, alopecia, dental disease, burn, etc.3 Bee wax is
obtained from the honey comb of the bees. In pharmaceuticals, it
is an ingredient of paraffin ointment. Dermatological and cosmetic
applications are probably the most common uses for bee wax and its
extracts. Its effects on tissue regeneration and renovation have been
well studied. Together with its bactericidal and fungicidal properties
bee wax provides many benefits in various applications in cosmetics.
In plastic surgery too bee wax extracts are used for improved wound
healing and reduced scar tissue development.
Composition
Gandhaka ointment comprises of Gandhaka, Tila oil and Siktha.
Name

English Name

Latin Name

Family
–

Gandhaka

Sulphur

–

Siktha

Bee Wax

Obtained from bees
Apis mellifera

Apidae

Tila oil

Sesame oil

Sesamum indicum
Linn.

Pedaliaceae

131

Main chemical constituents:
(a)

Gandhaka: Sulphur (S2).

(b) Tila Taila: Fixed oil, natural lipids,
glycolipids, phospholipids4.
(c)

Siktha: Myricin, free cerotic
acid, small quantity of melissic
acid and aromatic substance
cerolin.

Raw Sulphur.

Quality standards
Quality of Gandhaka and sesame oil is determined on the basis of
following parameters:
1. Gandhaka
Parameters

Impure
Gandhaka

Pure
Gandhaka

Carbon disulphide extract % w/w

100.00

95.7

1. Carbon disulfide

92.93

81.37

2. Chloroform

4.93

9.02

3. Hexane

2.69

5.36

Successive extract with % w/w

2. Sesame oil3
Foreign matter

Not more than 2%

Total ash

Not more than 9%

Acid-insoluble ash

Not more than 1.5%

Alcohol-soluble extractives

Not less than 20%

Water-soluble extractives

Not less than 4%

Fixed oil

Not less than 35%

Preparation of Gandhaka ointment
Step 1: Method of purification of Gandhaka
(1) Take fine powder of Gandhaka in a ladle, add a little amount of
clarified butter or ghee, melt it and pour into the vessel which
contains cow’s milk.
(2) This process is repeated seven times.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

132

(3) Collect the purified Gandhaka on cooling to room temperature
and wash with plenty of luke-warm water.
(4) After drying, prepare the fine powder of purified Gandhaka and
preserve it for further use.

Step 2: Take the ingredients in following proportion.
No.

Ingredient

Quantity

Proportion

1

Gandhaka powder

25 grams

1/4th part

2

Siktha (bee wax)

100 grams

1 part

3

Tila oil

500 grams

5 parts

Apparatus required for preparing ointment comprises mortar and
pestle, steel vessel, spoon, gas stove or heating plate, weighing
balance, and thermometer. The procedure is as follows:
(1)

Tila oil is taken in a steel vessel and heated up to 130 °C and
then cooled to 70° C.

(2) Dissolve small pieces of Siktha (bee wax) into the oil with
continuous stirring till a homogenous mixture called siktha
taila is obtained.
(3) Siktha taila is taken in mortar and triturated with pestle adding
Gandhaka powder till ointment-like consistency is achieved.

Precautions
(1) Over-heating of the oil should be avoided.
(2) The trituration should be firm enough to avoid formation of
gritty particles.

Dosage form
The preparation has ointment-like consistency with light-yellow colour
and a peculiar strong smell.
Therapeutic properties
Gandhaka ointment has parasiticidal, fungicidal, and antiseptic
properties.
Indications and uses
Gandhaka ointment is useful in fungal infections of skin, scabies,
eczema, and for application over chronic infective lesions.

133

Dose and mode of administration
(1)

Gandhaka ointment is applied externally on the affected parts
of the body once or twice daily and left on the lesions for an
hour or so.

(2) Thereafter, the lesions should be cleaned with warm water.
(3) Repeat the procedure daily for 7 to 10 days or till all the lesions
disappear.

Precautions and safety aspects
(1)

Gandhaka should not be used in formulations without subjecting
it to purification.

(2) Persons sensitive to sulphur should not use this application.
(3) If the skin lesions do not heal within a few days of application,
proper medical guidance should be sought.
(4)

Gandhaka ointment should not be used on open wounds and
lesions.

(5) Persons with scabies having secondary bacterial infection should
avoid the use of Gandhaka ointment.
(6) Persons known to have scabies should avoid having close skinto-skin contact until they have been cured.
(7) If a member of a family has scabies, all other household
members, sexual partners and close contacts should be treated
simultaneously.
(8) Use gloves and gowns when treating others with a suspicious
rash and itching.
(9) Wash all clothing, towels and bed linens that were used in the
last three days by the affected person, with hot water.
(10) Use the dryer at high heat rather than air drying. Since the mites
cannot survive on nonliving objects for several days, therefore
place the objects that are not machine-washable such as coats
and stuffed toys into a bag and store for a week.
(11) Cut nails and clean them thoroughly to remove any mites or
eggs.
(12) Try to avoid scratching and keep all open sores clean and
aseptic.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

134

References
(1)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Part I. New Delhi: Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
& Homeopathy, 2003. p. 217-219.

(2)

Tripathi KD. Essentials of medical pharmacology, 6th ed. Delhi: Jaypee
Brothers Publishers, 2008.

(3)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. 4. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2004. p.145.

(4)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used
in Ayurveda. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda &
Siddha, 2002. Vol. 5. p. 419.

Further reading
(1)

Shastri Ambikadatta. Rasaratna samuchya. Chapter 3. Varanasi:
Chaukhambha Amarbharati Prakashana Publishers, 9th edition, 1995.

135

23
Kapikacchu powder in sexual dysfunctions

Sexual dysfunctions are characterized by disturbance in sexual desire
and in the psycho-physiological changes that comprise sexual response
cycle. Such disturbances can cause marked distress and interpersonal
difficulty in enjoying sexual intercourse. The sexual response cycle
can be divided into the following phases:
(1)

Desire: This phase consists of fantasies about sexual activity
and the desire to have sexual activity.

(2)

Excitement: This phase consists of a subjective sense of sexual
pleasure and accompanying physiological changes. The major
changes in the male consist of penile tumescence and erection.
The major changes in the female consist of vasodilatation in
the pelvis, vaginal lubrication and expansion and swelling of
the external genitalia.

(3)

Orgasm: This phase consists of a peaking of sexual pleasure,
with release of sexual tension and rhythmic contraction of the
perineal muscles and reproductive organs. In the male, there
is a sensation of ejaculatory inevitability, which is followed by
ejaculation of semen. In the female there are contractions (not
always subjectively experienced as such) of the wall of the
outer third of the vagina. In both genders, the anal sphincter
rhythmically contracts.

(4)

Resolution: This phase consists of a sense of muscular
relaxation and general well being. During this phase, males are
physiologically refractory to further erection and orgasm for a
variable period of time. In contrast, females may be able to
respond to additional stimulation almost immediately.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

136

The sexual dysfunctions include:
(1) Sexual desire disorders: hypoactive sexual desire disorder,
sexual aversion disorder;
(2) Sexual arousal disorders: female sexual arousal disorder, male
erectile disorder;
(3) Orgasmic disorders like female orgasmic disorder, male orgasmic
disorder, premature ejaculation; and
(4) Sexual pain disorders like dyspareunia, and vaginismus.

The sexual dysfunction may be lifelong when it is present since
the onset of sexual functioning. Acquired type of sexual dysfunction
develops only after a period of normal functioning. Psychological
factors play a major role in the onset, severity, exacerbation, or
maintenance of the sexual dysfunction.
Kapikacchu is one of the famous herbal drugs mentioned in
Ayurvedic classics for various types of sexual disorders.

Kapikacchu [Mucuna pruriens (Linn.) D.C.]
Kapikacchu is an herbaceous, and twinning annual climber found
throughout India in the hills ranging up to 3000 ft. height. Hairs on
the pods of this climber are similar to that of monkey, that’s why
synonyms like Kapikacchu, Kapiloma, Kapi, Markati and Vaanari are
used for it. Most of the Ayurvedic remedies described in literature
for treating sexual dysfunctions and infertility contain Kapikacchu
seeds as one of the ingredients. Two types of Kapikacchu seeds are
described – wild and cultivated. The wild variety has better utility in
clinical practice than the cultivated one and black seeds are considered
better than white ones.

Composition
Kapikacchu powder consists of powdered seeds of Mucuna pruriens
(Linn.) DC.
English name

Cow hedge

Latin name

Mucuna pruriens (Linn.) D.C.

Family

Fabaceae

Parts used

Seeds

137

Pod of Kapikacchu.

Dried seeds of Kapikacchu.

Main chemical constituents1
Mucuna pruriens is a good source of L-dopa, it also contains a number
of amino acids.
Quality standards2
Quality standards of Kapikacchu seeds are based on the following
physical constants:
Total ash

Not more than 3.45%

Acid-insoluble ash

Not more than 0.33%

Alcohol-soluble extractives

Not less than 10%

Water-soluble ash

Not less than 0.4%

Method of preparation
(1) Clean the dried seeds of Kapikacchu by removing dust and other
foreign particles and grind them into a fine powder.
(2) Filter the powder through 85 mesh sieve and store in an airtight glass or plastic food container, away from direct sunlight
and in a cool place.
(3) The potency of Kapikacchu powder is best retained up to four
months after preparation.

Dosage form
Light-brownish powder.
Therapeutic properties3
Kapikacchu powder has aphrodisiac, nervine tonic, anti-parkinsonism,
anti-inflammatory, and hypocholesterolaemic properties.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

138

Dose and mode of administration
Seed powder in the dose of 3 to 5 grams once a day with warm
milk at night.
Indications and uses
Kapikacchu is useful in various sexual disorders including loss of

libido, erectile dysfunctions, night emission, premature ejaculation,
spermatorrhoea and oligospermia. It is also used in Parkinson’s
disease and hypercholesterolaemic conditions.
Precautions and safety aspects
(1) The use of Mucuna pruriens for a prolonged period causes
weight loss. The protein fraction is said to be responsible for
this effect.
(2) Judicious use in recommended dose is well tolerated.
(3) Persons consuming Kapikacchu may suffer from diarrhoea which
if not controlled with dietery changes and normal medication
may require discontinuation of Kapikacchu intake.
(4) Spicy, dry, sour and stimulant food items and emotional outbursts
should be avoided during medication with Kapikacchu.

References
(1)

Sabnis Mukund. Chemistry and pharmacology of Ayurvedic medicinal
plants (with organic structure & natural photographs). Varanasi:
Chaukhamba Amarbharati Prakashana, 2006. p. 232-233.

(2)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 1. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2001. p. 201.

(3)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used
in Ayurveda. Vol. 1. New Delhi: India Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda and Siddha, 2001. p. 202.

Further reading
(1)

Ahuja PC, Singh G. A clinical study on the role of Vajikarana in the
Shukra Dushti. Jamnagar: India Gujarat Ayurved University, 1992.

(2)

Amin YMN et al. Sexual function improving effect of Mucuna pruriens
in sexually normal male rats. Fitoterapia. 1996.

(3)

Dongarwar LA, Sharma JM. A study on Vajikarana karma of certain
Ayurvedic drugs with special reference to its effect on Shukra Vardhana.
Jamnagar: Gujarat Ayurved University, 1987.

(4)

Herbal aphrodisiacs: the premier collection. http://www.indigo-herbs.
co.uk/acatalog/Aphrodisiac.html (accessed 22-02-2010).

139

(5)

Influence of drugs on male sex behaviour and its pharmacological
aspect. Indian drugs. 1982.

(6)

Jani UB. Effect of certain Ayurvedic drugs in various Shukradoshas
in relation to male infertility. Jamnagar: Gujarat Ayurved University,
1981.

(7)

Jayatilak PG et al. Effect of an indigenous drug on accessory
reproductive function of mice. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology.
4(2), 1976.

(8)

Kapikacchu. Web site http://www.herbalayurveda.com/downloads/
kapikacchu.pdf (accessed 22 February 2010).

(9)

Mehra BL, Skandhan KP, Singh G. Studies on Klaibya (male sexual
dysfunction) and its management with Vajikarana. Jamnagar: Gujarat
Ayurved University, 1995.

(10) Pharmacological study - Aphrodisiac activity of the seeds of Mucuna
pruriens. Indian Drugs. 31(7), 1994.
(11) Raja Reddy G, Sharma PP. A comparative pharmaco-therapeutic
study of Erandamula and Kapikacchu beeja with special reference
to Vrushya karma. Jamnagar: Department of Dravyaguna, Gujarat
Ayurved University, 1999.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

141

24
Haridra powder and paste for sprain

The stretch or tear of soft tissues around a joint such as ligament
is known as sprain. Common symptoms and signs of sprain include
pain, swelling, bruising, instability and loss of function. One or more
ligaments can be injured at the same time. The severity of the pain
will depend on the extent of injury, i.e. whether a tear is partial or
complete and the number of ligaments involved.
A sprain can result from a fall, a sudden twist, or a blow to the
body that forces a joint out of its normal position. This results in an
overstretching or tear of the ligaments supporting that joint. Typically,
sprains occur when people fall and land on an outstretched arm, land
on the side of their foot, or twist a knee.
Haridra powder mentioned in Ayurvedic classics is a simple
formulation which is effective when taken internally as well as applied
locally.

Haridra (Curcuma longa Linn.)
Haridra is a dried rhizome of a plant that grows to 2 to 3 feet in
height with funnel-shaped yellow flowers. Haridra or turmeric powder
is bright yellow in colour. It has an earthy aromatic and spicy fragrance
with slightly bitter taste. Turmeric is an important spice in India with
medicinal value. Plants are gathered annually for their rhizomes
which are used fresh or in powder form. Turmeric is traditionally used
locally and orally in sprain and swelling resulting from it. It is known
to have anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects, and may be used

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

142

in inflammation induced joint pain and related symptoms. In recent
studies, the three major curcuminoids found in turmeric have been
found to limit the activity of chemicals and enzymes responsible for
inducing and maintaining inflammation. Curcumin is found to be a
powerful pain reliever in injuries and inflammatory conditions.
Composition
Haridra powder made from rhizomes is used orally as well as for
local application.
English name

Turmeric

Latin name

Curcuma longa Linn.

Family

Zingiberaceae

Parts used

Rhizome

Fresh turmeric rhizomes.

A bunch of turmeric plants.

Dried turmeric rhizomes.

Main chemical constituents1
Curcuminoids including yellow colouring principal – curcumin, and
an essential oil with high content of bisabolane derivatives.

143

Quality standards2
The identity, purity and potency of Haridra rhizome for oral use is
estimated on the basis of the following physical constants:
Foreign matter

Not more than 2%

Total ash

Not more than 9%

Acid-insoluble ash

Not more than 1%

Alcohol-soluble extractives

Not less than 8%

Water-soluble extractives

Not less than 12%

Volatile oil

Not less than 4%

Method of preparation
(1) Take 50 grams of dried rhizomes of Haridra and dry them further
to remove moisture for easy powdering. Rhizomes should have
been harvested not more than one year ago.
(2) Grind rhizome in grinder till fine powder is obtained.
(3) Filter the powder through 85 mesh sieve to remove coarse
fibers and other particles.
(4) Keep the powder in a dry and air-tight glass or plastic container
away from sunlight.

Dosage form
Dusty, yellow-coloured fine powder.
Therapeutic properties1
Tumeric powder has anti-bacterial, insecticidal, anti-inflammatory,
and anti-arthritic properties.
Indications and uses
(1) Sprain, inflammatory conditions of joints and burns are the
main indications for local application of Haridra paste. Haridra

powder is used internally for blood purification, skin blemishes
and allergic conditions.
Dose and mode of administration
(1) For oral use, the dose of turmeric powder for adults is 2 to 5
grams and for children it is 1 to 2 grams. The dose of fresh
turmeric juice is 10 to 20 millilitres in adults and 5 to 10
millilitres in children. Normally two doses a day should be taken
with water or mixed with honey.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

144

(2) A paste made from rhizomes, mixed with lime and salt, is applied
to the sprained area and removed when it gets dried.

Precautions and safety aspects
(1) Turmeric being regularly used as a food item is considered
safe and no adverse effects are reported of its long-term use.
However, its oral use in children and pregnant women should
be done under medical supervision. Turmeric or its alcoholic
extract administered respectively in the dose of 2.5 grams per
kilogram body weight and 300 milligrams per kilogram body
weight on different species of animals proved non-toxic. It is
safe for the baby if a nursing mother is taking this medicine.
(2) Turmeric’s side effects may occur with the use of more than
the recommended doses. In that case, it may cause stomach
upset or other gastrointestinal problems like diarrhoea.
(3) As turmeric is bitter in taste, it is better not to take its powder
or juice on empty stomach.
(4) Persons suffering from bile duct blockage, blood-clotting disorder
and stomach ulcers should not take turmeric in excessive
quantity.
(5) Treatment with turmeric may be stopped if it does not yield
beneficial effects in a couple of days and medical advice should
be sought.
(6) Proper rest to the affected part should be given along with the
application of medicament.
(7) Persons receiving aspirin or warfarin should take turmeric
with caution since their combined use may aggravate bleeding
tendency.
(8) The following measures can help to prevent or aggravate
sprain:
•

Avoid exercising or playing sports when tired or in pain.

•

Maintain a healthy, well-balanced diet to keep muscles
strong.

•

Practice safety measures to prevent falls.

•

Wear shoes that fit properly.

•

Do stretching exercises daily.

•

Warm up and stretch before engaging in any sport or
exercise.

•

Avoid running or fast walking on uneven surfaces.

145

References
(1)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 1. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2000. p. 154.

(2)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 45.

Further reading
(1)

Arora RB, Basu N, Kapoor V, Jain AP. Anti-inflammatory studies on
Curcuma longa (Turmeric). Indian J. Med. Res. 59(8), 1971.

(2)

Ayurveda and its scientific aspects. New Delhi: Department of Ayurveda,
Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy and Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research, 2006.

(3)

Bhavamishra. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Edited by Pandey, GS.
Varanasi: Chaukhambha Bharati Academy, 1999.

(4)

Indian herbal pharmacopoeia. Vol. II. Jammu-Tawi: Regional Research
Laboratory, and Mumbai: Indian Drug Manufacturers Association,
1998.

(5)

Khare CP. Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi: Springer (India) Pvt.
Ltd., 2007.

(6)

Khung N, Rastogi G, Grover JK. Anti-inflammatory and analgesic
activities of Curcuma longa. Indian J. Pharmacology. 1998.

(7)

Kundu S et al. Turmeric (Curcuma longa) rhizome paste and honey
show similar wound healing potential: a preclinical study in rabbits.
Int. J. of Low Extreme Wounds. (4), 2005.

(8)

Potnis VV & Grampurohit ND. Anti-inflammatory activity of the creams
containing turmeric and red sandalwood. Indian Drugs. (31), 1984.

(9)

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna Vignana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 2001.

(10) Yano S et al. Antiallergic activity of extracts from Curcuma longa:
active components and mechanism of actions. Phytomedicine. 3
(Suppl. 1), 1996-97.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

147

25
Lavanga oil for toothache

Toothache is a commonly encountered problem. Any inflammatory
condition affecting the gums and tooth pulp gives rise to pain. Enamel
of tooth is insensitive to pain, toothache occurs only when the enamel
is eroded. In most cases toothaches are caused by problems in the
teeth or gums, such as cavities, gum disease, the emergence of
wisdom teeth, a cracked tooth, infected or inflamed dental pulp,
jaw disease or exposed tooth root. After having one or more teeth
extracted, a condition known as dry socket can develop, leading
to extreme pain. The severity of a toothache can range from mild
discomfort to excruciating pain, which can be chronic or sporadic.
This pain can often be aggravated by chewing or by hot or cold
temperatures. Severe pain may be considered a dental emergency.
Toothache is a common symptom of an acute tooth abscess. It is
associated with persistent throbbing pain at the site of the infection.
Putting pressure or warmth on the tooth may induce extreme pain. In
some cases, a tooth abscess may perforate bone and start draining
into the surrounding tissues creating local facial swelling. In some
cases, the lymph nodes in the neck get swollen and tender in response
to the infection.
Though the cause of the toothache should be established before
starting the treatment, topical application of clove oil to the affected
area can be a first-aid management which is well-documented as an
effective remedy in Ayurvedic classics.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

148

Lavanga [Syzygium aromaticum (Linn.)
Merr. & Perry]
Lavanga is the dried flower bud of Syzygium aromaticum, a tree
cultivated in many parts of the world and also to a considerable
extent in South India. Flower buds are collected twice a year, in
the months of October and February when they change colour from
green to crimson, and are dried carefully and separated from their
peduncles. Clove is a fragrant floral bud, black or brown in color,
widely used in Indian cuisines. Its pungent aroma and flavour is
very familiar from its use as a culinary herb. The oil extracted from
cloves is used as a home remedy for toothache. It is an ingredient
of tooth powders, gargles and chewing gums. The oil is also used
as a local analgesic for hypersensitive dental cavities; a mixture of
clove oil and zinc oxide is used in dentistry as a temporary filling
for tooth cavities.
Composition
Lavanga oil is extracted from the buds of clove.
English name

Clove

Latin name

Syzygium aromaticum (Linn.) Merr. & Perry

Family

Myrtaceae

Parts used

Flower buds

Leafy branch of Lavanga and unripe
cloves in inset.

Dried cloves.

149

Main chemical constituents1
Eugenol, eugenol acetate and caryophyllene.
Quality standards2
The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India provides quality standards of
Lavanga based on the following physical constants:
Foreign matter

Not more than 2%

Total ash

Not more than 7%

Acid insoluble ash

Not more than 1%

Alcohol soluble extractives

Not less than 3%

Water soluble extractives

Not less than 9%

Volatile oil

Not less than 15%

Method of preparation
Clove oil is usually available in grocery and medical shops. It is
prepared by water distillation of clove buds containing the desired
percentage of eugenol.
Dosage form
Clove oil has a warm, strong, spicy smell and the oil is colourless to
pale yellow with a medium to watery viscosity.
Therapeutic properties3
Clove oil is analgesic, anaesthetic, antiseptic, refrigerant, digestive,
carminative, stomachic, anti-spasmodic and rubefacient.
Dose and mode of use
(1) Cotton swab soaked in clove oil should be kept on the affected
tooth without touching the gums.
(2) Clove oil-soaked tissue paper can also be applied directly to the
affected site of the tooth. It may be used 2 to 3 times a day.
(3) Gargles with one to two drops of clove oil in a cup of warm
water are useful as a mouth wash for toothache and gum
problems.

Indications and uses
Clove oil is useful in toothache, halitosis, cephalalgia, dental caries,
and painful condition after tooth extraction.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

150

Precautions and safety aspects
(1) Clove oil is irritant and pungent. Therefore, it is advised to
prevent the oil from touching the tongue and gums.
(2) If topical application of clove oil fails to relieve the pain, take
dental consultation.
(3) Clove oil application in deep dental cavities should be done
carefully.
(4) Clove is toxic, its oral use in large amounts (i.e. more than
3.7 g/kg body weight) may be life threatening.
(5) Enough information about safety is unavailable for the oral
use of cloves and clove supplelments in pregnant and breast
feeding women.
(6) Undiluted clove oil may cause allergic itching, rash and even
burns, so its local application should be done carefully.

References
(1)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part 1. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 81.

(2)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
harmacopoeia of India. Part.1. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 80.

(3)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 4: New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2001. p. 359.

Further reading
(1)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. 2nd revised English edition. Part I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy 2003.

(2)

Sharma P V. Dravyaguna Vigyana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukahambha
Bharati Academy, 1996.

(3)

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhamba Bharati
Academy, 1982.

(4)

Indian Herbal Pharmacopoeia. Vol. II. A joint publication of Regional
Research Laboratory, Jammu Tawi and Indian Drug Manufacturers’
Association, Mumbai, 1999.

(5)

Warrier PK et al. ed. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. 5. Madras: Orient
Longman Ltd. 1994.

(6)

Meena MR, Sethi V. Antimicrobial activity of essential oils from spices.
J. Food Sci. Technol. 1994.

(7)

Sarin YK. Illustrated manual of herbal drugs used in Ayurveda. New
Delhi: Council of Scientific and Industrial Research & Indian Council
of Medical Research, 1996.

151

26
Gokshura powder for urinary disorder

Difficult urination or dysuria is a general term referring to disturbances
of varied nature in urinary flow and consistency, but by and large
this condition represents difficulty in passing urine. Other problems
in the urinary system include kidney failure, urinary tract infections,
stone in kidney, ureter and urinary bladder, prostate enlargement
and impaired bladder control. These problems usually manifest in
the form of difficulty in urination, incontinence of urine, retention of
urine or abnormally altered amount of urine. Urinary problems may
be caused by the following:
(1) Increasing age: As one gets old; changes appear in the
structure and capability of kidneys, ureters, bladder and
urethra. These age-related changes tend to bring about
disturbances in the production and flow of urine.
(2) Urinary Infections.
(3) Urine incontinence: Decrease in the strength of pelvic muscles
and bladder sphincters usually associated with age, can cause
incontinence, i.e. inability to hold urine.
(4) Functional damage to kidneys: Any illness or injury to the
kidney and other parts of the urinary tract can impair urine
formation and proper passing of urine.
(5) Uncontrolled high blood pressure, diabetes, chronic obstruction
in the path of urine and untreated prostate enlargement
usually lead to a disturbance in kidney function.
Symptoms of various urinary disorders include frequent urination,
particularly at night; burning or difficulty during urination; infrequent
urination and presence of blood or any other abnormal component
in the urine.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

152

Depending upon the extent and nature of the underlying condition,
the following symptoms may be associated with the main urinary
disorder indicating failure of renal functions including: loss of appetite,
nausea and vomiting, fatigue, puffiness around eyes, swelling of hands
and feet, darkening of skin, muscle cramps, high blood pressure,
frequent headache, and itching all over the body.
Whatever may be the cause of a urinary disorder, it is always
important to treat the symptom. Judicious use of Gokshura, a
traditionally used medicinal herb, is effective in successful management
of urinary disorders and should be resorted to, in case proper medical
facility is not readily available and the patient is not suffering from
severe symptoms of urinary disorder.

Gokshura (Tribulus terrestris Linn.)
Gokshura is a prostrate, annual or biennial weed of the pasture lands
growing in hot, dry and sandy regions in the rainy season. The herb
has natural occurrence but it can be propagated by seeds. The fruits
are small, rounded and spiny consisting of five woody chambers, each
with many seeds. Harvesting should be done preferably in winter
when the properly dried ripe fruits could be preserved to retain
potency till the next rainy season. Fruits, roots and the whole plant
alone or in combination with other medicinal plants are extensively
used in Ayurvedic medicine for the treatment of genito-urinary
disorders ranging from difficulty in urination to urinary stones and
sexual weakness. Simple and multi-ingredient formulations made of
Gokshura are listed in the Ayurvedic Formulary2 and Pharmacopoeia
of India1 and scientific studies have provided enough evidence of its
varied usefulness in urinary and other diseases.

Composition
The powder and decoction of Gokshura are made from dried ripe
fruits or the entire plant.
English name

Land caltrops, Puncture vine.

Latin name

Tribulus terrestris Linn.

Family

Zygophyllaceae

Parts used

Fruits and whole plant

153

Dried Gokshura fruits.

Gokshura twig with a flower
and fruits.

Main chemical constituents1
Potassium nitrate, sterols, sapogenin, diosgenin, chlorogenin.
Quality standards1
Quality standards of Gokshura fruits as per Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia
are based on the following physical constants:
Foreign matter

Not more than 2%

Total ash

Not more than 15%

Acid-insoluble ash

Not more than 2%

Alcohol-insoluble extractives

Not less than 6%

Water-soluble extractives

Not less than 10%

Microscopically, the fruit shows small epidermal cells in each
coccus with rosette of calcium oxalate crystals in abundance.
Method of preparation
Depending upon the duration of treatment take 50 to 100 grams of
dried fruits or whole plant harvested not more than one year before.
The raw material should be dried further by keeping it in sunlight
or in a drier.
Make fine powder in grinder and filter it through a 85 mesh sieve to
remove coarse woody particles and fibers. Keep the powder in an airtight glass or plastic food container away from moist surroundings.
Decoction of Gokshura is prepared by boiling 20 to 30 grams of
the coarse powder of the raw material in 160 to 240 milliliters water
till one fourth liquid remains. Decoction has to be prepared daily and
consumed fresh same day.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

154

Dosage form
Fine, pale-coloured powder and straw-coloured decoction.
Therapeutic properties3
Gokshura has cooling, diuretic, anti-urolithiatic, styptic, antimicrobial,
muscle relaxant, aphrodisiac, emollient, anti-inflammatory and cytoprotective properties.
Dose and mode of administration
The adult dose of Gokshura powder is 3 to 6 grams, twice a day,
with water before meals. The dose of decoction for adults is 40 to
50 milliliters and it should be taken lukewarm.
Indications and uses
Gokshura is indicated for burning urination, difficulty in passing
urine, decreased urination, urinary crystals and stones, albuminuria,
haematuria and spermaturia.
It is useful for improving the urinary function and management of
urinary complaints resulting from inflammation, infection, ulceration,
calculi and abnormal discharge4.
Benign prostate enlargement and erectile dysfunction are the
other indications where Gokshura alone or in combination with other
medicinal herbs is used5.
Precautions and safety aspects
(1)

Gokshura is conventionally regarded as safe. No side effects or
toxic symptoms and contraindications are reported in Ayurvedic
literature. However, in experimental studies seeds of the plant
are found to be toxic to the liver of rats. Therefore, patients
with liver dysfunction should use Gokshura without seeds and
continue medication under medical supervision.

(2) As Gokshura is cooling in nature and the indicated urinary
disorders result from predominance of dry and hot contents in
urinary system, it is always advisable to avoid during medication
alcoholic beverages and diet rich in spicy, pungent, sour, acidic,
hot and dry food items. Indulgence in aggression, anger, furious
states of mind and suppression of natural urges of urination,
passing stools and flatus should be avoided.
(3) Simple, soft, digestible and liquid-rich diet is recommended
while suffering from and medicating for urinary disorder. Old

155

rice, barley, butter-milk, pumpkin and aloe are useful articles
of diet for patients of urinary disorder.
(4) Patients suffering from urinary disorder should abstain from
strenuous exertion, excessive thirst and frequent sexual
intercourse.
(5) Severe urinary symptoms with presence of pus and blood in
the urine and inability to urinate should be properly treated
under medical advice. If the patient’s symptoms get aggravated
or do not respond, medication with Gokshura may be stopped
and medical advice should be sought.
(6) Urinary symptoms usually worsen, if constipation is concomitantly
present. In such cases due care should be taken to treat
constipation with modification in diet or with the use of a soft,
lubricating laxative.
(7) The symptoms of urinary disease may mimic other medical
conditions. Therefore, if empirical treatment with a given
formulation fails, it is always advisable to consult medical expert
for diagnosis and proper management
(8) Use of Gokshura is safe during pregnancy and lactation.

References
(1)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2001. p. 40.

(2)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Part I. 2nd revised English edition. New Delhi: Department
of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 2003. p. 67, 68.

(3)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2001. p. 229-230, 232.

(4)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2001. p. 229-230.

(5)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2001. p. 232.

Further reading
(1)

Anand R, Patnaik GK, Kulshreshtha DK, Dhawan BN. Activity of certain
fractions of Tribulus terrestris fruits against experimentally induced
urolithiasis in rats. Indian J. Exp. Biol. 32(8), 1994.

(2)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Bhartiya Ayurved yog
sangraha. New Delhi, 1989.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

156

(3)

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1982.

(4)

Dipak P. et al. Evaluation of tribulus terrestris (Chotagokhru). Indian
Drugs. 22(6), 1985.

(5)

Handbook of domestic medicine and common Ayurvedic remedies. 2nd
ed. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha,
1999.

(6)

Khare CP. Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi: Springer (India), Pvt.
Ltd., 2007.

(7)

Pharmacological investigations of certain medicinal plants and
compound formulations used in Ayurveda and Siddha. New Delhi:
Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1966.

(8)

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna Vijanana. Part II. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 1981.

(9)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic formulary
of India. Part I. 2nd revised English ed. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2003.

157

27
Ela powder for vomiting

Vomiting is the oral expulsion of upper gastrointestinal contents
resulting from contractions of the gut and thoraco-abdominal wall
musculature. Vomiting is coordinated by the centres in brain and is
effected by neuromuscular responses in the gut, pharynx and thoracoabdominal wall.
The causes of vomiting are diverse and include gastritis,
indigestion, gastrointestinal infection, worm infestation, obstruction in
the gastrointestinal tract, inflammatory diseases of abdominal organs,
myocardial infarction, raised intracranial pressure, motion sickness,
pregnancy, uraemia, drugs, acute hepatitis and liver failure and may
be psychogenic.
Psychogenic vomiting without any gastrointestinal cause is seen
in persons suffering from anxiety and it usually occurs in the morning
on awakening. Early morning vomiting is a frequent symptom in
hypersensitive pregnant women in early pregnancy. This type of
vomiting rarely occurs in the later part of the day. Water brash
(regurgitation of stomach juices into the mouth), nausea, loss of
appetite, salty taste in the mouth, etc. are the common associated
symptoms of vomiting resulting from gastrointestinal causes. These
symptoms do not accompany vomiting of psychogenic origin. By and
large, this type of vomiting is a short-lived symptom and manageable
with diet regulation and simple medication. Acute vomiting causes
dehydration, fluid and electrolyte imbalance. Weight loss may result
from chronic vomiting.
Ascertaining the cause of vomiting is essential so as to rule out
serious illnesses. However, irrespective of the cause and nature of
vomiting, it is always important to treat this symptom to prevent fluid

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

158

and electrolyte imbalance in the body system and untoward effects
on the functioning of vital organs.
Judicious use of simple home remedies such as cardamom (Ela)
is effective in successful management of vomiting and should be
resorted to, in case proper medical care is not readily available.

Ela [Elettaria cardamomum (Linn.) Maton]
Ela (Cardamom) is one of the common spices found in almost every
Indian kitchen and is known for its medicinal properties in traditional
medicine. It is a stout large perennial herb that grows naturally and
also cultivated in many parts of south India at elevations from 750 to
1500 metres. Ela seeds are used for aromatic and appetizing property
in various food preparations and for chewing alone or along with other
aromatic spices as a mouth freshener and appetizer. It is an effective
home remedy for many common ailments of the digestive system.
Many Ayurvedic formulations described in classical literature have
powdered Ela seeds as one of the ingredients. Powder of cardamom
seeds alone is specifically indicated for the treatment of symptoms
resulting from excess heat or acidity in the body system. Easy
accessibility, cost effectiveness, long history of safe use, palatable
taste and small dose are attributes that make this formulation a
simple but ideal home remedy for first-hand management of common
ailments like vomiting, loss of appetite, indigestion, gastric irritation,
nausea, burning sensation, thirst, giddiness, burning urination, bad
smell from mouth, etc. This herbal drug is described as Sukshmaila
in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India1 and is widely used by
the people in self-health-care. Eladi powder described in ancient
classical Ayurvedic texts is a popular formulation made of Ela seeds
and other herbal ingredients for the management of different kinds
of vomiting2.

Composition
Ela powder consists of finely powdered seeds of dried fruits of
cardamom.
English name

Cardamom

Latin name

Elettaria cardamomum (Linn.) Maton

Family

Zingiberaceae

Parts used

Seeds

159

Ela fruits.

Ela plants.

Main chemical constituents3
Essential oils (α-terpineol, myrcene, etc.).
Quality standards4
The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India provides quality standards of
Ela seeds based on the following physical constants:
Foreign matter

Nil

Total ash

Not more than 6%

Acid-insoluble ash

Not more than 4%

Alcohol-soluble extractives

Not less than 2%

Water-soluble extractives

Not less than 10%

Volatile oils

Not less than 4%

Method of preparation
(1) Not more than one-year-old dried cardamom fruits with
adequate aroma are taken in as much quantity as is required
for making powder for medicinal use. Remove dust and any
other foreign matter and the outer skin of the fruits before
grinding the seeds to make powder. About 10 grams of seeds
are sufficient for a treatment period of seven to 10 days.
(2) Grind the seeds in a clean grinder or mortar to make a fine
powder and filter it through a metallic sieve. It is difficult
to make powder, if the seeds are not properly dried due to
presence of high moisture content. The powder should not be
filtered through coarse cloth as it absorbs the essential oil,
which contains aromatic and bio-active chemical constituents.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

160

(3) Seed powder is then kept in a dry air-tight small bottle, away
from direct sunlight where the temperature normally does not
exceed average room temperature. Keeping the powder in hot
surroundings should be avoided as it facilitates loss of volatile
content leading to reduced therapeutic potency.

Dosage form
Brownish powder with strongly aromatic odour and characteristic
taste. The powder can be filled into capsules.
Therapeutic properties
(1)

Ela has cooling, anti-emetic, stimulant, carminative, digestive,
stomachic and appetizing properties5.

(2) Pharmacological studies have proven Ela seeds to have antiinflammatory, analgesic, anti-spasmodic, anti-microbial and
anti-fungal properties6.

Dose and mode of administration
(1) Seed powder of Ela (Cardamom) is recommended in a dose
of 250 milligrams to 500 milligrams (about 3-4 pinches), for
adults and 60-120 mg for children, two to three times a day
with a little warm water or any soft, sweet syrup, e.g. honey.
It is advisable to consume the powder on an empty stomach
or half-an-hour before eating meals.
(2) The best way to consume Ela powder for control of vomiting
is to swallow it with a small amount of water or syrup. Intake
with a large amount of water or any other liquid should be
avoided.
(3) In cases of vomiting due to indigestion, gastritis, pregnancy
and high levels of blood urea in kidney failure, it is advisable
to administer concoction of Ela powder in small frequent doses
for fast absorption of the medicine.
(4) Concoction is prepared by putting half to one teaspoonful (2.5
to 5 grams) of Ela powder in 30 milliliters of warm water and
kept as such for 30 minutes and then it is filtered on getting
cooled. Infusion is given in the dose of 5 to 10 milliliters (one
to two teaspoonfuls) at regular intervals and is to be consumed
the same day.

Indications and uses
Nausea, vomiting, gastritis, indigestion, anorexia, excessive thirst,
giddiness and bad taste of mouth.

161

Precautions and safety aspects
(1) Traditionally, cardamom seeds are regarded as safe owing to
their use as a home remedy and a common spice in various food
items and beverages. No adverse effect and toxicity is reported
in the literature. However, there are reports that cardamom
seeds can trigger gallstone colic and hence not recommended
for self-medication in patients with gallstones.
(2) Patients with vomiting as a major symptom should take small
meals in liquid or semi-solid forms made of soft easily digestible
materials. Overeating, irregular eating and heavy, fiber-rich and
spicy foods should be avoided.
(3) Fresh concoction of cardamom seeds as described above should
be used if the patient does not find seed powder palatable.
(4) Strenuous work, anxiety and stress should be avoided for
successful management of vomiting. Adequate bed rest
and sleep at proper time help a lot to enhance the effect of
medication.
(5) Medical advice should be sought if vomiting is drastic and
is not controlled with Ela powder and the patient’s condition
deteriorates rapidly. The underlying cause of vomiting must be
properly treated with suitable medication.
(6) Mere symptomatic relief of vomiting should not be attempted, if
the condition gets severe and non-responsive to self-medication
with Ela powder and similar other home remedies.
(7) Medication with Ela powder should be restricted to mild to
moderate vomiting mainly resulting from gastrointestinal causes
and pregnancy. Specific treatment of the underlying cause is
required in kidney failure, cancer of stomach, worm infestation,
brain tumour and psychogenic vomiting.
(8) Ela powder is safe during pregnancy and for breast-fed
children.

References
(1)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 101-102.

(2)

Shastri AD. Bhaishajyaratnavali. 19th ed. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Prakashana. 2008. p. 490.

(3)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 101.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

162

(4)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I. Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 102.

(5)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 5. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2002. p. 392.

(6)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 5. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2002. p. 393.

Further reading
(1)

Chopra RN, Nayar SL, Chopra IC. Glossary of Indian medicinal plants.
New Delhi: Publications and Information Directorate, Council for
Scientific and Industrial Research, 1986.

(2)

Chunekar KC. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Vol. 2. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati, 1982.

(3)

Warrier PK et al. eds. Indian medicinal plants. Madras: Orient Longman
Ltd., 1995.

(4)

Khare CP. Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi: Springer (India) Private
Limited, 2007.

(5)

Kirtikar KR, Basu BD. Indian medicinal plants. Vol. IV. Allahabad: LM
Basu, 1989.

(6)

Kurup PNV, Ramadas VNK, Joshi P. Handbook of medicinal plants. New
Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, 1979.

(7)

Sharma PV. Classical uses of medicinal plants. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Vishvabharati, 1996.

(8)

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna Vijnana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhamba
Bharati Academy, 2001.

163

28
Haridra powder for wound

Wounds are commonly encountered. Though extremely common,
without proper and timely intervention, they may get complicated
leading to sepsis, septicaemia and scarring. Wounds are due to
various types and intensity of physical injury wherein the skin is torn
or punctured or a contusion is formed due to blunt force. Accordingly,
a wound is called open when the skin is breached due to injury
and closed when there is no tearing or cutting of skin. A wound is
considered minor when it is superficial, away from natural orifices,
with minor or no bleeding and not caused by a tool or instrument
or animal.
Other types of wounds including stab and gunshot wounds and
those with doubtful background are considered as major or severe
and must receive proper medical attention. In severe open wounds,
the risk of blood loss and infection is high. Such wounds need to be
cleaned and covered until medical help is provided. Internal wounds
are comparatively dangerous as the extent of damage to the tissues
is not known.
Here, the term wound is confined to external and superficial injuries
including incised wounds, lacerations, abrasions, puncture wounds,
contusions and mild haematoma. If not severe and complicated,
wounds can be successfully managed with simple traditional medical
care making use of Haridra.

Haridra (Curcuma longa Linn.)
Haridra is a well established medicinal plant of Indian medicine
known for its wound healing properties. Classical medical literature is
replete with the uses of turmeric and adequate evidence is available

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

164

for its antiseptic, anti-inflammatory, anti-bacterial and anti-allergic
properties1. The earliest reference to turmeric with its indications
for skin diseases and wounds is found in Ayurvedic text Charaka
Samhita. Use of turmeric is recommended for facilitating wound
healing in para-surgical procedures prescribed in Ayurveda such
as leech therapy for chronic wounds and Kshara Sutra therapy for
piles and fistula. Turmeric is the most common household medicine
for first-hand management of injuries and wounds. Its juice, paste,
powder, decoction and various formulations are used externally and
internally. Haridra is dried rhizome, like that of ginger, of a perennial
herb of Zingiberaceae plant family, which is extensively cultivated
in all parts of India and harvested between October to April when
the lower leaves of the plant turn yellow. The rhizomes are boiled
and then dried and the skin peeled off. Turmeric is available in the
market both in raw and powder forms. Powdered Haridra is an
essential commodity in Indian homes used as a condiment in almost
all sorts of cooking.
Composition
Haridra powder is made of a single herbal ingredient Haridra.
English name

Turmeric

Latin name

Curcuma longa Linn.

Family

Zingiberaceae

Plant part used

Rhizome

Whole plants of Haridra with rhizomes.

Dried rhizomes of Haridra.

165

Main chemical constituents1
Curcuminoids including yellow colouring principal, curcumin, and an
essential oil with high content of bisabolane derivatives.
Quality standards2
For quality assurance of turmeric rhizome, the following parameters
are recommended in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India.
Foreign matter

Not more than 2%

Total ash

Not more than 9%

Acid-insoluble ash

Not more than 1%

Alcohol-soluble extractives

Not less than 8%

Water-soluble extractives

Not less than 12%

Volatile oil

Not less than 4% volume/weight.

Quality testing of turmeric is done by adding concentrated
sulphuric acid or mixture of concentrated sulphuric acid and alcohol to
the powdered turmeric. Appearance of deep crimson colour confirms
the quality.
Method of preparation
(1) Powder of turmeric is prepared by grinding dried rhizomes in
a grinder or pulverizer and then sieved through mesh size 80.
The powder should be kept in a clean container and stored in
a dry area away from direct sunlight.
(2) Decoction of turmeric for washing wounds is made by boiling
10 grams of powder in 200 millilitres of water till one fourth
liquid remains.
(3) Paste for application over the wound is prepared by mixing 5
to 10 grams of turmeric powder in an equal amount of clean
water.

Dosage form
Yellow-coloured fine powder, decoction, and paste.

Therapeutic properties3
Haridra has anti-inflammatory, blood purifying, anti-allergic, antibacterial, anti-fungal, anti-protozoal, demulcent and wound-healing
properties.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

166

Dose and mode of administration
Haridra may be used simultaneously for washing the wound,
application as paste on wound and orally in the following ways and
dose schedule:
(1) For oral use the dose of turmeric powder for adults is 2 to
5 grams and for children it is 1 to 2 grams or juice of fresh
turmeric in the dose of 10 to 20 millilitres for adults and 5 to
10 ml for children. It is administered twice daily with water
or honey.
(2) Wash the wound twice daily with turmeric decoction.
(3) Apply a thin paste of turmeric over the wound and keep it for
8 to 10 hours and then remove by gently washing the affected
part with luke warm water. Alternatively, the wound is dressed
with gauze soaked in turmeric decoction or juice or mixture of
turmeric and mustard oil or honey. A new dressing should be
used after cleansing the wound.

Indications and uses
(1) External and internal use of turmeric is indicated in acute and
chronic wounds with not much damage to the tissues.
(2) Sepsis, allergic reaction, inflammation and skin discoloration
around the wound are also manageable with oral use and topical
application of turmeric.

Precautions and safety aspects
(1) Due care must be taken to keep the wound clean and dry. It is
advisable to use turmeric decoction for washing the wound.
(2) Frank bleeding and pus discharge from the wound should be
attended to properly.
(3) Treatment with turmeric may be stopped if it does not yield
beneficial effects in a couple of days.
(4) Being regularly used as a food item, turmeric is considered safe
and no toxic or adverse effects are reported of its long-term
use. However, its oral use in children and pregnant women
should be done under medical supervision. It is safe for the
baby if a nursing mother is taking this medication.
(5) Persons receiving aspirin and warfarin should take turmeric with
caution since their combination may cause bleeding.
(6) Side effects with turmeric may occur with use of more than the
recommended doses. In that case, it may cause stomach upset
or other gastrointestinal problems such as diarrhoea.

167

(7) As turmeric is bitter in taste and may induce nausea or
vomiting, it is better not to consume the powder on an empty
stomach.
(8) Persons suffering from bile duct blockage, blood-clotting disorder
and stomach ulcers should not take turmeric in excessive
quantity.

References
(1)

Sharma PC, Yelne MB, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used
in Ayurveda. Vol. 1. New Delhi: India Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda and Siddha, 2000. p. 154.

(2)

India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Ayurvedic
pharmacopoeia of India. Part I Vol. I. New Delhi: Department of Indian
Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy, 2001. p. 45.

(3)

Sharma PC, Yelne M.B, Dennis TJ. Database on medicinal plants used in
Ayurveda. Vol. 1. New Delhi: Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha, 2000. p. 152, 154.

Further reading
(1)

Ayurveda and its scientific aspects. New Delhi: Department of Ayurveda,
Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy and Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research, 2006.

(2)

Bhavamishra. Bhavaprakasha Nighantu. Edited by Pandey GS. Varanasi:
Chaukhambha Bharati Academy, 1999.

(3)

Indian herbal pharmacopoeia. Vol. I. Jammu-Tawi: Regional Research
Laboratory, Council for Scientific and Industrial Research; Mumbai:
Indian Drug Manufacturers Association, 1998.

(4)

Khare CP. Indian medicinal plants. New Delhi: Springer (India) Pvt.
Ltd., 2007.

(5)

Khung N, Rastogi G, Grover JK. Anti-inflammatory and analgesic
activities of Curcuma longa. Indian J. Pharmacology. 18(1), 1998.

(6)

Sharma PV. Dravyaguna Vignana. Vol. II. Varanasi: Chaukhambha
Bharati Academy, 2001.

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

Herbal medicines constitute the main component of traditional medicine,
which have been used since thousands of years. They have made
significant contribution to human health through their health promotive,
curative and rehabilitative properties and in the prevention of illnesses.
Indeed, many herbal remedies used traditionally have become modern
medicines through drug development. Digoxin, morphine, colchicine, and
artemisinin are some notable examples. Long tradition of use of many
herbal remedies and experiences passed on from generation to generation
has brought about reliance by the people on herbal remedies. At present,
the use of medicinal plants for health benefits is increasing worldwide.

It is an attempt to promote the rational, safe and appropriate use of
herbal medicines and mainstreaming of traditionally used herbal
remedies. This manual can be used by health planners, policy makers,
national and district health authorities and others involved in the health
sector development and reform. It is also an attempt to increase
availability and accessibility to cost-effective treatment of commonly
encountered health problems with herbal remedies. It will be useful for
education and training of community health workers as well. These efforts
would eventually promote 'health for all' in the context of primary health
care.

ISBN 978 92 9022 382 5

World Health House
Indraprastha Estate,
Mahatma Gandhi Marg,
New Delhi-110002, India
Website: www.searo.who.int

9 789290 223825

Traditional Herbal Remedies for Primary Health Care

This publication contains 28 monographs on common ailments which
can be readily treated with simple herbal remedies. They can be prepared
easily and used within the ambit of primary health care. Each monograph
provides description of the ailment, the form of traditional preparation, its
composition, English name, Latin name and family of the plant, plant part
used, main chemical constituents, quality standards, method of
preparation, dosage form, therapeutic properties, indications and uses,
dose and mode of administration, precautions and safety aspects, and
important references.

Traditional Herbal Remedies
for Primary Health Care

