AUTHENTIC AYURVEDA AT

ANCIENT WISDOM MODERN CONCEPT
Lalithadripura, Mysore, Karnataka, India — 570028

Foreword
The purpose of this ebook is to give our readers a basic understanding of ​Ayurveda
treatments and its philosophy. To kindle in the reader’s mind an interest to learn
more on this subject. Leading an ​Ayurveda lifestyle to keep ​mind-body balanced
health today so that one could attain the goal of life-“Enlightenment” is the main
philosophy of Ayurveda​ and Yoga.

History of Ayurveda
Ayurveda is the oldest surviving ​holistic medical system in the world. It offers a rich,
comprehensive outlook to a healthy life; its origin is in the Vedas which are known to
be more than 5000 years old. Ayurveda describes the ​Vedic wisdom of how to live a
healthy and peaceful life. Together with Yoga, it gives a detailed blueprint for a
fulfilled enlightened life.

P a g e |​ 1

Authentic Ayurveda
Ayurveda tells us that the root cause of all diseases is seeded in the ​past karma
(Karmic imprints) during the ​sojourn of the soul. When ​bad karma is unfolding, it
manifests in various forms of ill health. To cure and pacify the disease, one needs to
do one or more of the following:
● Medication use
● Do charitable donations
● Do various Japas (constant repetition of a mantra, Jap perform)
● Perform Homam/Yajna​ (offering to various planets and deities through fire)
● Worship deities
The treatment approach required for the particular individual if necessary is
determined by reading one’s birth chart ​(Medical astrology) and ​Vastu ( the art of
placement- Reference book to read “Vaastu Workbook by Dr. Talavane Krishna. The
birth chart and Vaastu will reveal the effects of various cosmic forces affecting the
individual. Briefly speaking Astrology and Vastu unfolds our soul’s blueprint.
At Indus Valley​, we take a much deeper holistic approach to your wellness through
authentic Ayurveda.
Most of the time, people are on several medications. We delicately adjust those
medications in consultation with modern medicine specialists if necessary and take a
holistic i​ ntegrated healing​ approach.

P a g e |​ 2

The Purpose of Ayurveda Treatments
The aim of this system is to prevent illness, heal the sick and preserve life. This can
be summed up as follows:
● To protect health and prolong life (”Swasthyaya swasthya rakshanam”)
● To eliminate diseases and dysfunctions of the body (”Aturasya vikar
prashamanamcha”)

The Basic Principles of Ayurveda Treatment
Ayurveda is based on the premise that the universe is made up of five elements: air,
fire, water, earth, and ether. These elements are represented in humans by three
”doshas”, or energies: Vata, Pitta, and Kapha. When any of the doshas accumulate in
the body beyond the desirable limit, the body loses its balance. Every individual has a
distinct balance, and our health and well-being depend on getting the right balance
of the three doshas (”tridoshas”). Ayurveda suggests specific lifestyle and nutritional
guidelines to help individuals reduce the excess dosha.
A healthy person, as defined in Sushrut Samhita, one of the primary works on
Ayurveda, is ”he whose doshas are in balance, appetite is good, all tissues of the
body and all natural urges are functioning properly, and whose mind, body, and spirit
are cheerful”

Tridosha Theory
The three doshas or bio-energies found in our body are:

● VATA pertains to ​AIR and ​SPACE (ether) elements. This energy is generally
seen as the force, which directs nerve impulses, circulation, respiration, and
elimination. Recollection of stored memory is Vata function. If Vata is out of
balance people become forgetful, not able to recall quickly past memories and
information. Interrupt conversations, Become poor listeners. A person with

P a g e |​ 3

Vata imbalance may have a dry, slim and petite body. The hair, nails, teeth
and eyes may appear arid and rough; the voice is frail, low and cracked. Due
to the dryness, the vata individual does not get enough sleep. The diet,
movements, and activities of such a person are volatile and hasty. The mobile
nature of vata results in unsteadiness and excessive movements of joints,
eyebrows, chin, lips, tongue, neck, shoulders and limb. Such people are quick
in initiating responsibilities but get irritable, upset or emotionally disturbed
fast. They possess good grasping powers but have a poor memory. The cold
nature of vata results in body stiffness, intolerance towards cold, tremors or
shivering. The natural desires and cravings are inclined to warm food and
warm climate. They often dream of running, jumping and climbing trees and
mountains.
● PITTA pertains to ​FIRE and ​WATER elements. This dosha governs
metabolism, e.g., the transformation of foods into nutrients. Pitta is also
responsible for metabolism in the organs and tissue systems. Synthesis of
information into knowledge is the function of Pitta Individuals with Pitta
imbalance have higher metabolic rate, excess appetite and have excessive
thirst. They have tendencies to develop moles and skin eruptions, have soft
and scanty hair and furthermore have a tendency towards baldness or
premature graying of the hair. They perspire a lot. These individuals get
wrinkle-skinned early in life, are intolerant towards heat, become egoistic, and
judgmental. They frequently dream of gold, sun, fire, fights, and lightning.
They get easily annoyed and have poor physical endurance.
● KAPHA ​pertains to ​WATER and ​EARTH elements. Kapha is responsible for
growth and protection. The mucosal lining of the stomach, and the
cerebral-spinal fluid that protects the brain and spinal column are examples of
kapha. Storing of knowledge and memory is the function of Kapha.People of
this constitution have an oily skin that is soft and clear. With a pleasant
appearance, good complexion and voice, they are normally calm and cool in
temperament and have very mild emotional botherations. On the other hand,
if Kapha is imbalanced they become lethargic, have a poor appetite, and
scanty sweat secretions. But basically, these individuals are well built with a
sturdy body and compact body organs. They commonly dream of birds,
flowers/garlands, swans, water bodies, and romantic events. Kapha people
have a good libido. They are strong, learned, and energetic with long life
spans.

P a g e |​ 4

Panchakarma Treatment
If toxins in the body are abundant, then a cleansing process known as panchakarma
is recommended to purge unwanted toxins. This five-fold purification therapy is a
classical form of treatment in Ayurveda. These specialized procedures consist of the
following:
● Therapeutic vomiting or emesis (Vaman)
● Purgation (Virechan)
● Enema (Basti)
● Elimination of toxins through the nose (Nasya)
● Bloodletting or detoxification of the blood (Rakta moksha)
Properly performed, Panchakarma removes both Physical and Mental toxins. If
allowed to stay for longer periods, these toxins set in motion many imbalances to
take place and manifests in various diseases. Ayurveda recommends regular
Panchakarma once a year to maintain good health. An Ayurvedic doctor (Vaidya)
after your consultation will advise the right type of Panchakarma for you.

Rejuvenation Treatments
Apart from Panchakarma, there are many rejuvenation treatments in Ayurveda,
which should be taken more frequently and regularly for tridosha balance.

P a g e |​ 5

Indus Valley Ayurvedic Centre

The Centre is situated at the foot of the scenic Chamundi Hills and adjacent to the
Royal Lalitamahal Palace. The Centre has been designed on the basis of ancient
principles of Vastu, the science of construction and architecture. Consequently, all
structural features blend harmoniously to provide a sublime sense of experience and
harmony. Furthermore, the functional aspects of the Centre are fashioned to
accommodate the five elements in a natural way.
EARTH represented by herbs used for the therapies, ​WATER in the form of
decoctions and the tempting swimming pool, ​FIRE represented by diyas (ethnic
lamps), and sound represented by the reverberating Primordial ​OOOOM sound
throughout the property. ​SPACE represented by aromatherapy, and reflecting the
skies above.

P a g e |​ 6

Accommodation

Comfortable, simple and private, with ample facilities to give you peace and comfort.
Guest rooms are built to achieve an ideal ambiance for an ​Ayurvedic center​.
Pleasant panoramic view from the guest rooms, alluring gardens, and silent
walkways, chirping birds all combine to create a poetic scene. Even the resonating
om mantra on the property adds to the healing and ​spiritual enrichment​. The
constructions of our villas are based on e
​ co-friendly practices​.

Ayurvedic Treatments
An assortment of meticulously designed therapies and compatible ​yoga program are
the Centre’s corner-stones. True to the Ayurvedic beliefs, of endorsing every
individual uniquely, the Centre’s health packages are tailor-made to complement
each of our guests’ constitution.

Ayurvedic Diet
Annapoorna (complete food, refers to the goddess Annapoorna), our in-house
restaurant, offering a choice of simple yet wholesome vegetarian ​Ayurvedic cuisine
using fresh fruits and vegetables will keep you coming back for more. Our courteous
and efficient staff ensures personalized service round the clock.

P a g e |​ 7

The Ayurvedic kitchen is considered a pharmacy. Most health problems can be
prevented and treated by the ​Ayurvedic diet itself​. A proper blending of ​six tastes​;
salt, sour, hot, sweet, astringent and bitter is very important to maintain the ​tridosha
balance and maintain ​perfect health​. Eating food is considered as a ​Yajna. Through
eating, we offer the food as ​Havish to all the different ​cosmic forces of the universe
through our ​gastric fire​. The ​Ayurvedic diet is pure, fresh, wholesome and should be
prepared with loving hands. When such food is taken it increases ​Satvik energy in
the person. At ​Indus Valley​, we strive to prepare such food for you in our kitchen
called annapoorna (complete food). The food becomes ​tridosha balancing and
brings ​Satvik state of mind​.

Ayurvedic Consultation
Knowledge of ​Vedic astrology​, ​Vastu (art of construction of house/workspace and
interior decoration), and detailed consultation by a knowledgeable ​ayurvedic vaidya,
(Ayurveda doctor) who will do ​ayurvedic pulse reading (nadi Vigyan) ​are important
to comprehensively understand the problems being faced by the individual.
A complete history of ​health problems and a detailed discussion will take place
between you and the ​vaidya. If you need (as most people do) an ​integrative health
approach, it will be discussed in detail. You will also get detailed advice on an
Ayurvedic lifestyle and an Ayurvedic diet based on your ​body constitution​. At the
time of your departure, your ​Ayurvedic doctor will give you a summary of your
Ayurveda treatments​ taken and the advice to follow.

P a g e |​ 8

Vikriti (dosha imbalance)
According to Ayurveda, when doshas are imbalanced, it is called Vikriti. When a
state of Vikriti gets established it will affect the ​seven dhatu (tissues); blood, plasma,
fat, muscle, bone, bone marrow, and seminal fluid, the three malas​, feces, urine and
sweat; and ​Agni (digestive fire)​ and result in various diseases.

Healing through Ayurveda
Our ​mind-body constitution has channels called ​srotas in Ayurveda​. All our
thoughts, nourishments, excretions, digestion and everything that transforms from
one form to another has to move in the body and this process takes place through
various channels such as nerves, digestive tract, blood and lymph vessels and so on.
Even individual cells have Srotas such as cell membranes. There are sixteen Srotas in
our bodies.
For anything to move we need energy called VAYU. There are ​ten vayus​, which are
responsible to move everything whatever is in the Srotas.
Then there are ​72,000 ​nadis. These are something like receptors. They carry and
interlink the messages from one point to another in the body with specific
information. These Nadis act like tributaries; of ​three Nadis that are, Vata, Pitta, and
Kapha. Through ​AYURVEDIC PULSE ​READING all the information about our ​mind
body, soul and our ​human connection to the universe can be studied. This Nadi
reading is truly an art that can only be learned through a proper teacher. It is not
totally physical. It is mostly intuitive, occultic and mystic also. One needs to learn
how to dive into the soup of ​quantum depth of which we are part of. We are the
microcosmic representation of the macro cosmos. All information about our ​mind
body​ and the influence of the universe on us is carried through these ​three Nadis​.
The following illustration should help our readers to understand this. Imagine various
radio broadcasts hovering around us in various frequencies. We tune the radio to a
particular frequency by passing a specified amount of electricity to a crystal and as
soon as the crystal vibrates to the required frequency it will catch the particular
frequency of the broadcast and provides the information in an audio form. Similarly
various types of information are carried through the Nadis like radio frequencies.
When you empty your mind while seeking specific information, a specified electric
voltage, you connect to that frequency and receive the information.
Ayurvedic treatments cleanse the Srotas and remove blockages at various levels in
the body and mind. Further, they strengthen the Vayus and balanced Vayus make
Srotas work effectively and efficiently; The Nadis continuously monitor this process
and provide information on any imbalances in the system.

P a g e |​ 9

Therefore proper functioning of the Srotas, Vayus, and Nadis are the key for perfect
health, a perfect symphony of body, mind and spirit. This is the essence and spirit of
Ayurveda treatments.

Treatments Include
●
●
●
●
●
●

Rejuvenation
Panchakarma (Detox)
Skin Treatments (Beauty Enhancing)
Yoga Therapy
Acupuncture
Kshara Chikitsa

Rejuvenation Treatments
Rejuvenation treatments at IVAC are designed to revitalize the body tissues, remove
accumulated stress and toxins from mind and body, which are usually the result of
unhealthy lifestyle. These treatments replenish the vital fluids, thereby increasing our
body’s resistance against diseases and promoting longevity. Rejuvenation therapies
ensure optimum strength and good health. Bring calmness, improve concentration,
memory and make the skin look radiant. Increases Satva and Ojas.

Panchakarma Treatments
IVAC offers a range of curative treatments that balance the doshas. There are five
different methods (Panchakarmas) of removing different types (Vata, Pitta, Kapha) of
toxins from the body. Chronic health problems such as neurological disorders,
digestive problems, circulatory disorders and degenerative diseases respond well to
Ayurvedic treatments.
There are many other health issues such as; obesity, stress, insomnia, migraine,
sinusitis, anemia, anxiety/depression, cholesterol disorders, hypertension, sciatica,
diabetes, paralysis, Osteo and rheumatoid arthritis, neck and back pain.
Panchakarma is recommended to all on a regular basis to cleanse and detox the
body. This would act as a preventive health care and helps maintain an ageless body
and timeless mind.

Beauty and Skin Care Treatments
Ayurved has elaborate descriptions regarding beauty enhancing and skin treatments.
At Indus valley, we offer chemical free, all natural, skin care and beauty treatments,
especially for the hands, feet, hair, and face. We also offer Mehndi artwork.

P a g e |​ 10

Ayurvedic treatments as Rejuvenation Therapies
Abhyanga and Sweda
● Number of Therapists: 2
​
● Duration: ​45 minutes
● Sweda (steam):​ 10 minutes

Abhyanga means a whole body massage in the ancient tradition of Ayurveda. This is
performed by two therapists using warm medicated oil. Moving their hands
synchronously all over the body including the Marma points followed by a medicated
steam bath and shower. The massage oil is specially prepared at our Centre. The oil
nourishes the skin and mobilizes deeper tissues. Abhyanga refreshes and revitalizes
the body.

P a g e |​ 11

Benefits of Abhyanga and Sweda Treatment
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Increases body’s resistance against diseases
Improves blood circulation
Balances doshas, particularly Vata.
Removes fatigue
Improves digestion
Ensures sound sleep
Promotes vitality and enhances the functioning of senses.
Removes toxins from the body via skin and colon.

Shirodhara (Thread of Bliss)
Duration 45 Mins:
This treatment gives best results when taken along with Abhyanga. This spa ritual
creates a seamless rhythm that will lead you into a very peaceful and profoundly
deep state of relaxed awareness. This deceptively simple technique of running a fine
stream of warm oil, buttermilk, milk or ghee (clarified butter) on the middle of the
forehead, recharging the body, and brings clarity to the mind and offers a quiet
space to experience our true selves. This procedure gives best results when taken
after an Abhyanga. It balances and nourishes the sixth chakra (AJNA) and removes
any spiritual obstructions from this chakra.

P a g e |​ 12

Benefits of Shirodhara Treatment
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

It Prevents hair falling out and hair loss while stimulating hair growth.
Tension headaches
Premature baldness and premature graying of hair
Mental and emotional stress
Diseases connected with the head, such as those that affect the neck, eyes,
ears, nose, and throat.
Many diseases of the nervous system like the nerve disorders, facial palsy,
paralysis and ptosis (drooping) of the eyelids; and is beneficial in curing
long-standing insomnia and schizophrenia; its beneficial for seizures in
epilepsy when used in conjunction with other medicines
Headache and burning sensation in the eyes
Nourishes and rejuvenates the body
Stimulates the nervous system
Improves digestion
Sharpens the sense organs
Improves the quality of voice
Gives strength to the neck and head
Brings luster to skin; cools the body and relieves pain
Invigorates the body and mind and stimulates cognitive memories helps
relieve fatigue, tension, anxiety, anger, chronic headaches, rheumatism,
hypertension, asthma and stress
Disperses negative electrical impulses that accumulate at the skull and hairline
from stress
Rejuvenates the entire face and softens worry lines
Activates the pituitary gland increasing spiritual awareness
Regulates mood and depression disorders

Shirodhara is one of the most effective treatments for reducing stress and nervous
tension. It works through Tarpak Kapha, Sadhak Pitta, and Pran Vayu. Continuous
pouring of the oil over the forehead for a specific period of time induces sleep and
has a tranquilizing effect.
According to modern medicine, the local application like ointment passes through the
stratum corneum into the blood vessel and reaches the appropriate organ. Thus the
oil poured on the forehead is absorbed and easily reaches the brain cortex.
According to Ayurveda, Tarpak Kapha and BhrajakPitta are the basic factors
responsible for the nourishment of hairs. Shirodhara increases the level of
neurotransmitters which provide relief in anxiety and thereby decreases the hair
falling out. Shirodhara also leads to relaxation of head and neck muscles thereby
increasing the blood supply to the head, which encourages new hair growth with
improvement in the quality of hair. The continuous pouring of herbal-oil in

P a g e |​ 13

Shirodhara induces hormonal balance and consequently, the BMR (Basal Metabolic
Rate) is increased, giving a new feeling of refreshment.

Laghu Abhyangas
● Shirobhyanga (Head and Neck Massage)
● Number of Therapists: 2
● Duration: 20 minutes
Shirobhyanga is a method of applying warm herbal oil and massaging the head, neck
and the shoulder region including the Marma points.

Benefits of Laghu Abhyangas Treatment
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

It Provides mental stability.
Enhances concentration and memory.
Treats insomnia.
Reduces body heat.
Controls premature graying of hair and hair loss.
Relieves exertion and headaches.
Is effective for treating eye and ear disorders.
Helps relieve stress accumulated in the neck and shoulder area.

P a g e |​ 14

Padabhyanga (Ayurvedic foot rejuvenation)
● Number of Therapists: 2
​
● Duration: ​20 minutes
An Ayurvedic Foot and leg massage that stimulates all organs of the body and
increases Ojas to induce a state of deep relaxation. It brings a sense of total wellness
in the entire system. The feet are one of our five organs of action.

The following benefits are attributed to Padabhyanga
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Helps with Insomnia
Decreased Nervousness
Combating dryness and numbness of the feet
Energizing the belly, pelvis, and colon
Improves circulation, fertility, digestion
Reduces and regulates blood pressure
Instantly relieves restless leg syndrome when used with salt and coconut oil

P a g e |​ 15

Mukhabhyanga (Ayurvedic face rejuvenation)
● The number of therapists: 2
​
● Duration: ​30 minutes

Experience how this unique combination of a gentle balancing touch, massaging of
marmas (the vital energy points), stimulating scalp massage, together with the use of
aromatic oils can deeply calm, refresh and re-energize both your face and your whole
being. This is followed by mild fomentation and pouring of medicated oil at a specific
temperature into the nasal orifice.
● Sinusitis, migraine, rhinitis and ENT problems.
● Brings back younger looking face.
● Lessens wrinkles and expression lines.
● Releases stress and tension of the surrounding muscles.
● Brings positive and self-assured expression on to the face.
● Creates a toned and improved complexion.
● Gives a feeling of well-being.
● Promotes total relaxation and is excellent for tension headaches
● Addresses eye strain and stress-related symptoms.

P a g e |​ 16

Udavartana
● Therapists: ​2
● Time: ​45 Mins

Therapists work on your body using an herbal oil paste, which has a special effect in
reducing cellulite and excess fat in unwanted regions of the body.
● Helps reduce obesity.
● Clears obstructions from the body channels especially skin pores.
● Alleviates Vata and Kapha.
● Strengthens the body organs.
● Increases skin complexion.
● Improves metabolic functions.
● Help eliminates excessive medha (Fat tissue).
● Improves skin and muscle tone
● Removes dead skin to make your skin look younger and healthier.

P a g e |​ 17

Padaghata
● Therapists: ​2
● Time: ​45 Mins
This is a special method of deep tissue massage by feet. You will be lying on a soft
mat on the floor. After the massage you will receive a steam bath followed by
shower.

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Enhances vision.
Relieves burning eyes.
Alleviates Vata and Kapha.
Reduces cellulite and fat.
Improves skin complexion.
Clears obstructions of energy channels especially skin pores.
Strengthens the body and its internal organs.

P a g e |​ 18

Netra Tarpana (Netra Basti, Akshi Tarpana)
● Therapists:​ ​2
● Duration: ​30 Minutes
Netra Tarpana means to bathe the eyes. This is done by using pure cow’s Ghee
(clarified butter) or medicated Ghee.

Its benefits are the following:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Enhances vision
Relieves strained eyes
Reduces dryness and burning sensation in the eye region
Helps strengthen eye muscles
Ensures with getting good sleep
Provides relaxation
Helps to prevent early formation of cataract and other eye disorders
Reduces stress lines and puffiness from around the eyes
Returns the eyes’ natural luster
Enhances depth and colour perception and it promotes a deep and calm
perception

P a g e |​ 19

Kati Basti
● Therapists:​ 2
● Duration:​ 30 minutes
Kati Basti means bathing the lower back with medicated oil or a herbal decoction.
After a gentle massage of the lower back, by using a herbal dough, a rounded
doughnut-shaped ring is formed and medicated oil is poured into it.

The benefits of this treatment include
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Relief from chronic and acute back pain.
Useful for a prolapsed disc.
Balances the Vata and nourishes the intervertebral disc.
Help with lumbar spondylitis.
Help with Osteoporosis and sciatica, and the strengthening of the
muscles.
Revitalizing the Apana Vayu.

The lower back, the root chakra and the second chakra (Muladhar and Swadhistan)
are the sites of Apana Vayu (pelvic area). After reaching middle age Apana Vayu
starts weakening as part of aging process. This leads to (unless properly
strengthened and revitalized through proper exercise, lifestyle, and breathing
techniques), many age-related health problems such as spondylitis, osteoarthritis,

P a g e |​ 20

constipation, low libido, impotence, vaginal dryness, prostate enlargement, urinary
problems, menstrual problems, leg pains and cramps. People with weak Apana Vayu
experience multiple psychological problems also.

Greeva Basti
● Number of therapists:​ 2
● Duration:​ 30 minutes
In Greeva Basti, medicated oil or herbal decoction is used to bathe the back of the
neck. The process is similar to Kati Basti.

The benefits of this treatment include:
● Treats for cervical spondylitis.
● Relieves chronic pain and stiffness in the neck region and strengthens the
neck muscles, thereby facilitating proper mobility.

Janu Basti
● Number of therapists: 2
​
● Duration: ​30 minutes
Warm medicated oil or herbal decoction is used to bathe the knees. The procedure is
similar to Kati Basti.

P a g e |​ 21

Benefits of this treatment include
●
●
●
●

Treating Osteoarthritis
Relieves knee pain
Strengthens muscles
Balances Sleshaka Kapha, which regulates the synovial fluid in the joint, which
is necessary for proper lubrication of the joint.

Chakra Basti
● Number of therapists:​ 2
● Duration:​ 30 minutes
In Chakra Basti, a warm medicated oil or herbal decoction is used to bathe the naval
region, Solar Plexus. The Solar Plexus is very important to the proper functioning of
many of the body’s organs as well as offering support to various organs like the
stomach, spleen, pancreas, and liver.
In Holistic healing, the solar plexus is known as the third chakra. This is responsible
for emotional balance and self-love. Meditation will bring a greater sense of well
being. Our personalities are developed through our third chakra. Our self-esteem and
sense of self, otherwise called our ego is determined by this.

P a g e |​ 22

The benefits of this treatment include
● Relieves pain and strengthens abdominal muscles
● Relieves constipation
● Improves digestive power by strengthening the Agni and balancing the Vata
and Pitta.

Hrid Basti
● Number of therapists:​ 2
● Duration:​ 30 minutes
In Hrid Basti, the warm medicated oil or herbal decoctions are poured over the heart
region.

P a g e |​ 23

The benefits include
●
●
●
●
●

Cardiomyopathy
relieves pain in the region
strengthens the chest muscles
normalizes heart function and pacifies Vata
It helps to remove the negative emotions such as unresolved anger,
frustration, and sadness

Navarakizhi (Shastika Shali Pinda Sweda, SSPS)
● Number of therapists:​ 5
● Duration: ​2:30 minutes
SSPS is a special technique of massaging the whole body with boluses prepared out
of red rice cultivated under specific conditions and dipped in herbal decoction and
warm milk.

P a g e |​ 24

Benefits of this treatment include
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Choice of treatment after paralytic strokes
It Relaxes and rejuvenates
Ensures a good appetite
Induces sound sleep
Is good body purification
Enhances Longevity
Improves circulation
Decreases congestion and relieves body aches

Patra Pinda Sweda (PPS)
● Number of therapists:​ 5
● Duration: ​2:30 minutes.
PPS is a special technique of massaging the whole body with boluses prepared out
of medicated leaves, fried in sesame oil and dipped in warm herbal oil.

P a g e |​ 25

Benefits of this treatment include
●
●
●
●
●

It helps in relaxing
Improved circulation
Rejuvenation of the body
Induces sleep
Provides longevity and reduces body stiffness, pain, and joint inflammation

Kashayasekha
● Number of therapists: 6
​
● Duration:​ 2 Hours & 30 minutes
Kashayasekha is a process where a warm medicated herbal decoction is
continuously poured all over the body using a special cup.

P a g e |​ 26

The benefits of this treatment include
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Curing rheumatoid arthritis
Osteoarthritis
Varicose veins
Improves circulation
Relaxes and rejuvenates
Ensures good appetite
Is a good overall purifier
Offers longevity

Saravangadhara (Pizhichil)
● Number of therapists:​ 6
● Duration: ​2 hours & 30 minutes
During Saravangadhara, warm medicated oil or medicated milk is continuously
poured all over the body in the form of streams after massaging the entire body.

P a g e |​ 27

The benefits of this treatment include
● Cures chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS)
● ​Paralytic stroke recovery
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Improves the body’s immunity
Promotes healing of fractures
Relaxes and rejuvenates
Improves circulation
Ensures good appetite
Induces sleep
Is a body purifier and creates longevity

Shirobasti
● Number of Therapists: 2
● Duration: 45 to 90 minutes.
Shirobasti is a snehana treatment on the head. It involves the use of both herbal
paste and oil while the guest is sitting. Shaving of the head may be necessary in
some cases. A small tank of warm oil is held over the head for (30-50 minutes) by a
special cap whereby it is placed and sealed. Sometimes based on the condition of
the guest, a particular herbal paste is also applied to the head before the oil is

P a g e |​ 28

poured. This is done after an Abhyanga treatment and done for seven consecutive
days to get the desired effect.

The benefits of this treatment include
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Treatment of Vata disorders.
Insomnia.
Facial palsy (paralysis of the face).
Migraine.
Hemicrania (ardhavabhedaka).
Cataracts (abishyandha).
Eye diseases.
Heart diseases/chest pain.
Diseases of the head including tumors.
Loss of sensation of the skin.
Dryness of nasal passages, mouth, and throat.
A weakness of the joints.
Mental and physical exhaustion.
Urinary disorders (including diabetes).
A Grayish coating of the tongue.

Treatment of Pitta disorders
● Indigestion
● Pharyngitis
● Conjunctivitis

P a g e |​ 29

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

A burning sensation of the skin and shoulders
Excess sweating
Blood disorders
Hemorrhaging
Jaundice
Herpes
A yellowish coating of the tongue
A greenish, yellowish coloring of urine and feces.

Treatment of Kapha disorders
●
●
●
●
●
●

Anorexia
loss of appetite
A heaviness of body
Excessive sleep
Weak digestion
A white coating on the tongue

In addition to alleviating the above-mentioned conditions, this treatment has the
added benefit of rejuvenating the whole body, relieving exhaustion and restoring
luster to the skin. It also relieves mental stress, restores Prana in the heart, and
balances the doshas and increases Ojas of the body and mind.

Shiro Pichu (application of herbal paste / oil)
● Duration: Several hours or 30-45 minutes.
An herbal paste and or oil is soaked in a cotton pad and applied to the head and
covered by a castor leaf or banana leaf and tied in position.

P a g e |​ 30

The benefits of this treatment include
●
●
●
●
●

The treatment of Headaches
Treating hair Falling out
Premature graying of hair
Dandruff
Dry skin and baldness

Sudation Therapies
This is a luxurious bath in a copper bathtub filled with herbal decoctions and
aromatic oils.

The benefits of this treatment include
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Drowsiness
Relieves Tiredness
Wards off negative emotions and calms the Mind
Getting over jet lag and getting a deep sleep
Itching skin relief
Simply for pleasure
Relieves constipation

P a g e |​ 31

Panchakarma Ayurvedic treatments
Panchakarmas are detox procedures, which will help develop immunity against
diseases. They remove physical and mental toxins. They are an indispensable part of
the Ayurvedic lifestyle. Our lives are so engrossed in stressful living and working
conditions that we ignore the effects of various environmental pollution, unhealthy
and processed foods, competition, stress, and the media’s influence on us. These
factors result in maladies like high blood pressure, cardiovascular problems, diabetes,
chronic pains, obesity, depression, and more. The root cause for all these is the
accumulation of Ama (toxins), both physical and mental, which cause blockage of
vibrational energy channels. Physical toxins enter into our bodies mainly through our
dietary and living habits, environmental causes, seasonal changes and aging factors.
The mental toxins enter through our Karmendriyas (senses). Our body has a natural
instinct for the elimination of these toxins. However, due to the above-mentioned
factors, this wisdom becomes impaired and does not perform its function effectively.
So, to re-establish this natural balance and to dislodge these toxins, Ayurveda
prescribes Panchakarma.
Panchakarma, in Ayurveda, has a deep philosophical meaning of healing. It is the
ultimate detoxification process. As the name suggests, ‘Pancha’ in Sanskrit means
five and ‘Karma’ means actions, so literally translated ‘Panchakarma’, a set of five
systematic actions or treatments used for purification of the body. It is employed to
balance doshas and to flush out the toxins from the body through the normal modes
of elimination like the intestines, sweat glands, blood vessels and the urinary tract.
Thus, it restores internal balance and harmony in the body.

The process of Panchakarma incorporates 3 stages
1. Poorva Karma (Preparatory Phase).
2. Pradhana Karma (Main Panchakarma Phase)
3. Paschat Karma (Post Panchakarma Phase).

Poorva Karma (First Phase)
Poorva Karma involves a set of preliminary methods employed before Pradhana
Karma to prepare the body, in order to encourage the release of the deep-seated
toxins. This includes; Deepana and Pachana (Digestion and strengthening of Agni).
Panchakarma should not be performed when someone is suffering from poor
digestion, which is a low Agni. Even under normal circumstances, Agni must be
strengthened as a routine preparation before starting the next phase. Herbal
medication in the form of tablets, powders, herbal extracts or decoctions are
prescribed to be consumed 15 minutes before lunch/dinner. This is normally done for
2-3 days.

P a g e |​ 32

Snehana (Oleation)
Internal (taken on an empty stomach) and external (as oil massage) administration of
medicated oils for its therapeutic value are called Snehana. The internal
administration of medicated ghee (clarified butter) is Snehapana, which lubricates all
the channels and cells, including the lymphatic channels that bind to the toxins. It
also calms the mind and reduces mental stress by cleansing many unresolved
emotions at the sub-conscious level. After witnessing adequate signs and symptoms
of internal oleation, external herbal oil treatment in the form of massage is done at
dawn. The entire process of oleation goes on for 5-9 days depending on one’s
Prakriti (constitution) and the level of the dosha imbalance and the number of toxins
in the body.

Swedana (Fomentation)
The process of sweating through a wet or dry method is Swedana. The special
herbal steam dilates the body channels and helps to liquefy the toxins that are more
superficial.

Pradhana Karma (Second Phase)
The Panchakarmas are five different ways of removing accumulated toxins from the
body and mind.
Note: A Vaidya prescribes specific herbal medication and recommends an individual
to undergo a particular karma mentioned below depending on one’s Prakriti
(constitution) and Vikriti (imbalanced constitution).

1. Vamana Karma (Emesis Therapy)
The process involves inducing vomiting to expel the Kapha toxins from the chest and
the abdominal region. This is mainly administered for Kapha or Kapha dominant
disorders like bronchitis, chronic cold, sinus, asthma, cough, and respiratory
congestion. After the Poorva Karma, an herbal drink consisting of Madanaphala
(emetic nut), Yastimadhu (licorice) and milk is given early in the morning after
Abhyanga on an empty stomach.
As a result of which, vomiting will either occur spontaneously or is stimulated by
gently tickling the throat. The vomiting will take place smoothly drawing out all the
Kapha doshas from the body. Following this, an herbal dhoomapana (the smoking of
a herbal cigarette) is done to stop the feeling of nausea.
At Indus Valley, we have treated people suffering from chronic asthma all their life
and people with respiratory allergies. These people were on steroids,

P a g e |​ 33

bronchodilators, and various antihistamine drugs for a long time. They have become
totally free of their asthma and allergies after the Vamana Panchakarma.
The Avalambak Kapha and Udana Vaayu are the main culprits causing this dreadful
health problem. All over the world people spend billions of dollars in treating asthma
and respiratory problems. Ayurveda has one of the best remedies for this problem.
Generally, it is not indicated in older people and in people who have high blood
pressure.

2. Virechana Karma (Purgation Therapy)
Virechana is the technique of balancing doshas by means of therapeutic purgation.
Toxins, which have been lubricated and bound by the oleation are pulled into the
colon and expelled as loose motions several times. Virechana is facilitated with
medications like herbal paste, elixirs, decoctions, powders or tablets. This method
removes the accumulated Pitta toxins from the body and mind.

3. Nasya Karma (Errhine Therapy)

Distillation of herbal medications like oil, powder, and fresh juices through the
nostrils to balance doshas from the head region especially the head, nose, and
throat. This procedure is usually done for 3-7 days, where the prescribed drops of

P a g e |​ 34

herbal medication are administered into each nostril. The ideal timings for Nasya
Karma are in the morning for curing Kapha related problems, noon for Pitta disorders
and evening for Vata disorders. It is the best procedure for treating Sirorogas
(diseases affecting the head area) like migraines, chronic headaches, sinusitis, ear,
nose and throat disorders.

4. Basti Karma (Enema Therapy)
Basti is the process of administering herbal medication into the body through the
anal route to balance doshas, mainly Vata. The Colon is the predominant site of Vata.
Therefore, Basti is considered as an excellent therapy for Vata disorders. It heals
constipation, bloating, chronic fever, high blood pressure, sexual disorders, kidney
stones, heart pain, sciatica, arthritis, rheumatism, gout, muscle spasms and
headaches. Based on the drugs used, Basti is of two types:

Anuvasana Basti
Medicated oil or ghee is the major component of the Basti fluid. It is also known as a
retention enema. A small quantity (50 ml) of the medicine is administered as an
enema and it is retained for several hours. This helps in pulling the toxins, mainly
Vata along with some Kapha and Pitta to the colon. This is done soon after the food
is taken.

Niruha Basti
A decoction prepared from herbal extracts forms the major component of the enema
therapy. This enema is administered after Abhyanga on an empty stomach.
400-1000 ml of the medicine is administered as an enema and the guest is asked to
retain it for one hour and then let it come out. This is a very gentle procedure and can
be given to all ages. It is known as the mother of all treatments. The course of this
Panchakarma is 8, 16 and 24 days depending on the health problems identified.

P a g e |​ 35

5. Raktamokshana Karma (Bloodletting Therapy)

The process of removing the vitiated toxic blood from the body is termed
Raktamokshana. This is done either by direct puncture of the blood vessel or
incisions on the infected area with the help of Jalauka (Leeches), Raktamokshana
removes localized impurities from the blood, thereby healing a specific wound/and
purifying the whole body.

Paschat Karma (Third Phase)
After Pradhana Karma (second phase) the body is clear of toxins and all set for
restoration.
Soon after the Panchkarma the Agni (the digestive fire) becomes very weak, which
needs to be rekindled very gently. The gradual process of strengthening the
digestive ability is known as Paschat Karma. It comprises three steps.

Samsarjana
During this period the digestive power is brought back to normal by administering
liquid diet initially and progressing slowly to semi-solid and finally the normal diet.

P a g e |​ 36

Shamana
Once the digestive power is re-established, specific Ayurvedic medication is
prescribed based on the diagnosis. After cleansing the body of the toxins, the
medications work very effectively.

Rasayana
Taking herbal preparations to revitalize the body and mind and restoring the natural
luster, vigor, and immunity to the body.
The Panchakarma procedures are now well-recognized the world over and the
ancient wisdom of the Vedas has re-established its position once again. At our
Centre, careful attention is devoted to promoting Panchakarma in its pristine form.
We insist on absolute adherence from our guests regarding the seriousness of the
program. Since only those who follow the protocol correctly under the supervision of
our expert Vaidyas, experience the profound results of the therapy. Any deviation
from the rigorous stipulations may lead to unsatisfactory results. And in some
extreme cases, it may even be harmful to one’s well-being if not followed properly.
One can truly appreciate the benefits of Panchakarma by following the instructions
mentioned below.
The true benefits are felt two to three weeks post Panchakarma

Panchakarma Guidelines during Ayurveda treatment
1. Avoid smoking and consuming alcohol since they result in accumulation of
toxins in the body, both physical and mental. The very reason we are
administering Panchakarma for you is to remove these toxins. Thus, it is
absolutely necessary for you to abstain from these habits.
2. ​Keep yourself warm and use warm water for consumption and cleaning
purposes. Using cold water will prevent the medications served to you from
reaching the destinations, where the toxins are loaded. Warm water improves
peripheral circulation and thereby assists the medications in treading the right
path.

3. During the Panchakarma, you are recommended to wear a head cap, gloves,

socks and cover yourself with warm clothes. Sometimes it could be
uncomfortable because of the heat you experience, but it will benefit you with
better results.
4. Do not ignore your natural urges. Controlling urination or bowel movements
may result in re-circulation of toxins. So it is essential to flush out these
wastes from the body frequently.

P a g e |​ 37

5. Please note: Sex is not regarded as a natural urge. During Panchakarma,
having sex or having stimulating romantic thoughts are not recommended.
Ayurveda believes the final essence in men (Shukra dhatu) and in women
(Arthava dhatu) is vital for one’s physical, mental and spiritual energy. It is also
said to enhance the results of Panchakarma. Having sex or indulging in
romantic thoughts would deplete this final essence in the body. Therefore, it is
necessary to preserve this dhatu during and immediately after Panchakarma.
6. Avoid strenuous exercises. Any undue physical exertion/exercise will make
the medications you have taken to get absorbed in the body to the point
beyond getting bound to the toxins and eventually fails in its purpose of
Panchakarma. For this reason, our Vaidyas carefully formulate a set of yoga
exercises, which will not cause any harmful effects.
7. Converse in low tone! Conversing loudly due to anxiety/annoyance will not
allow the medication to reach the various organs where unresolved anger,
sorrow, and tensions are lodged. So to purify the mind through Panchakarma,
it is essential to abide by this particular advice.
8. Avoid sleeping during the day! Although one feels very sleepy especially
throughout the therapy period, please avoid falling asleep during the day as it
aggravates the Kapha toxins. This could be achieved by taking short walks
around the room and in the garden.
9. Avoid reading more than half an hour at a time. Reading at length strains both
body and mind, which is not advisable during Panchakarma. If you are so
inclined, you may read about holistic health or spiritual books. Some of the
good books to read are, “The New Earth”, “The Power Of NOW” by Eckhart
Tolle. If you would like more recommendations please make an appointment
at the reception to see the founder Dr. Talavane Krishna.
10.Watching TV, using a computer, reading newspapers should be minimal or
should be totally avoided.
11.Follow your dietary instructions. You will be given a special diet during
Panchakarma. Please consume only that diet. If you have any specific
questions regarding your diet consult our Vaidyas. Food will be served as
prescribed in the diet chart prepared by our Vaidyas based on one’s Prakriti
(constitution) and nature of treatment administered.
One may experience a headache, skin rashes/itching, diarrhea, nausea, low energy
level, abdominal pain, and mood variations. Please contact the Vaidya to be provided
with suitable relief.
Our Vaidyas may or may not permit you to continue with the medications, which you
are already taking for various ailments based on its ingredients, relevance, and
possibility of any drug interactions.

P a g e |​ 38

FAQ:
Question:
You are making me consume more oil and ghee although I am already obese and
have high cholesterol level. It is very difficult for me to understand how it balances
my chemistry and helps reduce my weight?

Answer:
The amount of medicated ghee/oil you take will not get digested to the point that it
will either increase your weight/cholesterol. The specific herbal ingredients added to
ghee/oil will prevent such side effects, very carefully bind to the toxins and remove
them systematically from your body and mind. In fact, after Panchakarma, most
people lose about 2-7 kgs of weight. And those who have had abnormal lipid
profiles will have a more balanced profile after Panchakarma. This has been proven
in many clinical studies. So there is no need to have any apprehension of increasing
weight and an abnormal lipid profile.

Question:
I am getting bored. I don’t have much to do here. Could you provide us with
television, internet or any other recreational facilities?

Answer:
At IVAC, we strongly believe in providing authentic Ayurveda with its core ideology
intact and ensure you get the best results from Panchakarma. It needs a certain
amount of courage, determination, and discipline to undergo this therapy. One is
expected to strictly follow the specific diet and recommendations advised by our
Vaidyas based on your constitution. And it is highly essential to remain calm and
resolved during this period. Hence, it is recommended to spend the time between
the treatments in meditation, introspection, contemplation and physical relaxation
rather than indulging in any media-related activities. Therefore, we have deliberately
not provided television and internet facilities in the guest rooms. However, we have
ensured that bare minimum requirements are available for you to keep in touch with
the loved ones. As a better substitute, the Centre offers tranquil gardens, ample
walking space and swimming pool (while you are taking Panchakarma no swimming
is allowed) for guests to relax. This routine might seem inconvenient, but we request
you to be patient, for you will truly appreciate the difference you notice in you after
Panchakarma.

P a g e |​ 39

Ayurveda for Skin Rejuvenation & Beauty Treatments
Soundaryavardhini - Ayurvedic face rejuvenation
● Duration:​ 45 minutes
Experience how this unique combination, a gentle balancing touch, use of Marmas
(vital energy points) together with the use of aromatic oils and natural and mostly
organic products can deeply calm, refresh and re-energize both your face and your
whole
being. Pollution and stress make the face wrinkled start looking tired and lose luster.
It is recommended that regular facials should be taken at least twice a month.

Benefits of Soundaryavardhini Treatments
● Nourishes and cleanses the tissues,
● Gives a glowing complexion to face
● Maintains good tone and elasticity of all layers of skin, plus helps to hold onto
youthful contours.
● Melts away facial tension
● Redirects subtle energies and relieves stiffness throughout the entire body.
● Deeply nourishes and strengthens the body.

P a g e |​ 40

● Gives you a sensual feeling of joyful bodily excitement, which re-energizes the
whole body

● Develops a depth of being that cultivates a willingness to care for others
● Brings you an inner richness that brings lasting beauty and attraction

Keshini (Ayurvedic hair rejuvenation)
Time: ​60 minutes
Several natural herbs are used on your hair after scalp stimulating, deeply relaxing
head massage. Your hair and scalp get deeply cleansed and polished. The hair will
look silky smooth.

The benefits of this treatment include
●
●
●
●
●
●

Rejuvenates your hair, shields from further damage to the cuticle.
Makes your hair look healthy and attractive by nourishing from the root.
Removes dandruff
Deeply relaxes and calms your mind
Prevents excessive hair loss and premature greying
Brings a cooling feeling to any burning sensation in the eyes and brings a
restful sleep.

P a g e |​ 41

Padashubhakari (Ayurvedic foot rejuvenation)
Time: ​30 minutes
Your experience begins with Soaking your feet in warm water, followed by
cleansing, scraping, trimming of nail beds, removal of dead skin.
Massage of your lower legs and feet and application of organic Neem leaf paste.

The benefits of this treatment include
● Removes tiredness from the legs as well as swollen feet, a consequence of a
long travel.
● Brings deep sleep.
● Cools the eye.
● Excellent for those who suffer from restless leg syndrome.
● Prevents phlebitis and is an excellent treatment during pregnancy.
● The Neem paste application is very helpful for many skin conditions like
eczema and infections. It also removes leg cramps by balancing Vata.

P a g e |​ 42

Karashubhakari (Ayurvedic hand and lower arm
rejuvenation)
This procedure is similar to foot rejuvenation.
The hands are the giving and receiving organs of our body, not just in the physical
sense but more as transmitting energy. The hands are full of Marma points. Five
elements, nine planets, and all our internal organs are represented in the hands. A
treat to the hands is a treat to the entire body and beyond.

Benefits of this treatment include
●
●
●
●

Energizes all internal organs
Corrects many health problems
Balances the elemental principles in and around our body
Planetary effects are balanced, strengthened and malefic forces are
neutralized.

P a g e |​ 43

Mehendi

Depending on how extensive your needs are, it is a Pitta pacifying cooling beauty
procedure. Beautiful intricate art designs are drawn over hands and forearms by our
experts using an herb called Henna. Mehendi is an old Indian tradition for a bridal
shower. When someone wears Mehendi it naturally invokes the romantic beauty in a
woman.

Ayurveda and Yoga Therapy
Yoga therapy is the adaptation of yoga practices for people with health challenges.
Yoga therapy involves practicing specific postures, breathing exercises, and
relaxation techniques. Medical research shows that Yoga therapy is among the most
effective complementary therapies for several common ailments. The challenges may
be, an illness, a temporary condition like pregnancy or childbirth, or a chronic
condition associated with old age or infirmity. Our yoga teacher will advise and teach
you appropriate Yoga postures in consultations with the Vaidyas.

Ayurvedic treatment using Kshara Karma Chikitsa
Kshara Karma is one of the minimally invasive procedures described in Shalya Tantra
(Surgery) of Ayurveda. Kshara means ‘alkaline extract of plants’ and Karma means ‘a
procedure’. Ksharakarma is a procedure wherein alkaline extracts of plants are used

P a g e |​ 44

for the treating surgical problems in the anorectal region. This procedure is described
in the Ayurvedic text written by Sushrutha dating back to 1500 BC. The
Ksharakarma procedure involves the application of alkaline extracts of plants like
Apamarga (Achyranthes Aspera) along with various other drugs like Guggulu
(Commiphora Mukul), Snuhi (Euphorbia nerifolia), Haridra (Curcuma longa) etc, in the
form of a paste (kshara lepa) or a coated thread (kshara sootra). ​Many clinical trials
have validated that this procedure is scientific, safe and successful in the
management of various ano-rectal diseases like hemorrhoids, fistula, anal fissure
and pilonidal sinus. Ksharakarma is not associated with complications such as anal
stenosis or incontinence or loss of sensation, which is not uncommon when these
anorectal diseases are treated through modern surgical procedures, also recurrence
rate is much higher than in Ksharakarma. This procedure may be performed in an
outpatient setting. Minimal or no pain is experienced after surgery. The whole
procedure takes less than 45 minutes. The patient is discharged on the same day
after several hours of observations in the recovery room. The full recovery takes less
than a week.

Acupuncture
We do not offer this service. The purpose of this writing is for information only.
The history of acupuncture goes back to Ayurvedic roots. It was known as Sooji
Chikitsa. At some point in history, it seems to have traveled to China and possibly
they developed their own version. Later, in the 70s after China opened its door to the
west, this science was extensively researched and was found to be evidence-based
practice. Currently, some insurance companies cover this service for reimbursement.
Below is given a brief on this healing science. The National Institutes of Health (NIH)
has funded a variety of research projects on acupuncture that has been awarded by
its National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM), National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institute of Dental Research,
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, and National Institute on
Drug Abuse. Acupuncture is a method of encouraging the body to promote natural
healing and to improve functioning. This is done by inserting needles and applying
heat or electrical stimulation at very precise acupuncture points.

Conditions treated through Acupuncture
Digestive; abdominal pain constipation diarrhea; hyperacidity indigestion; emotional
anxiety; depression insomnia; nervousness neurosis; eye-ear-nose-throat cataracts;
gingivitis; poor vision; tinnitus; a toothache; gynecological; infertility; menopausal
symptoms premenstrual syndrome; miscellaneous; addiction control; athletic
performance; blood pressure regulation chronic fatigue; immune system tonification
stress reduction; musculoskeletal; arthritis; back pain; muscle cramping; muscle
pain/weakness neck pain; sciatica; neurological; headaches; migraines; neurogenic;

P a g e |​ 45

bladder dysfunction Parkinson’s disease postoperative pain stroke; respiratory;
asthma; bronchitis; common cold; sinusitis; smoking cessation tonsillitis.
Source: World Health Organization United Nations.

How does acupuncture work?
The classical Chinese explanation is that channels of energy run in regular patterns
through the body and over its surface. These energy channels, called meridians, are
like rivers flowing through the body to irrigate and nourish the tissues. An
obstruction in the movement of these energy rivers is like a dam that backs up in
others. The meridians can be influenced by needling the acupuncture points; the
acupuncture needles unblock the obstructions at the dams and reestablish the
regular flow through the meridians. Acupuncture treatments can, therefore, help the
body’s internal organs to correct imbalances in their digestion, absorption, and
energy production activities, and in the circulation of their energy through the
meridians. The modern scientific explanation is that needling the acupuncture points
stimulates the nervous system to release chemicals in the muscles, spinal cord, and
brain. These chemicals will either change the experience of pain, or they will trigger
the release of other chemicals and hormones which influence the body’s own
internal regulating system. The improved energy and biochemical balance produced
by acupuncture results in stimulating the body’s natural healing abilities, and in
promoting physical and emotional well-being.

How many treatments will I need?
The number of treatments needed differs from person to person. For complex or
long-standing conditions, one or two treatments a week for several months may be
recommended. For acute problems, usually, fewer visits are required.

Are there any side effects from the treatment?
Usually not! As energy is redirected in the body, internal chemicals and hormones are
stimulated and healing begins to take place. Occasionally the original symptoms
worsen for a Few days or other general changes in appetite, sleep, bowel or
urination patterns, or emotional state may be triggered. These should not cause
concern, as they are simply indications that the acupuncture is starting to work. It is
quite common with the first one or two treatments to have a sensation of deep
relaxation or even mild disorientation immediately following the treatment. These
pass within a short time, and never require anything more than a bit of rest to
overcome.

P a g e |​ 46

What are the needles like? Do they hurt?
People experience acupuncture needling differently. Most patients feel only minimal
pain as the needles are inserted; some feel no pain at all. Once the needles are in
place, there is no pain felt. Acupuncture needles are very thin and solid and are made
from stainless steel. The point is smoothing (not hollow with cutting edges like a
hypodermic needle) and insertion through the skin is not as painful as injections or
blood sampling. The risk of bruising and skin irritation is less than when using a
hollow needle. Because your doctor carefully sterilizes the needles using the same
techniques as for surgical instruments or uses disposable needles, there is no risk of
infection from the treatments.

Does acupuncture really work?
Yes! In the past 2,000 years, more people have successfully been treated with
acupuncture than with all other health modalities combined. Today acupuncture is
practiced widely in Asia, Russia and in Europe. It is now being used more and more
in America by patients and physicians. Acupuncture treatments can be given at the
same time other techniques are being used, such as conventional Western medicine,
osteopathic or chiropractic adjustments, and homeopathic or naturopathic
prescriptions. It is important that your physician-acupuncturist knows everything
that you are doing, so he or she can help you get the most benefit from all your
treatments.

Are there any dos and don’ts for me on the day of a
treatment?
Yes! To enhance the value of a treatment, the following guidelines are important:
Do not eat an unusually large meal immediately before or after your treatment. Do
not over-exercise, engage in sexual activity, or consume alcoholic beverages within
six hours before or after the treatment. Plan your activities so that after the
treatment you can get some rest. This is especially important for the first few visits.
Continue to take any prescription medicines as directed by your regular doctor.
Substance abuse (drugs and alcohol) especially in the week prior to the treatment
will seriously interfere with the effectiveness of acupuncture treatments. Remember
to keep good mental or written notes of what your response is to the treatment. This
is important for your doctor to know so that the follow-up treatments can be
designed to best help you and your problem.

P a g e |​ 47

Ayurvedic treatment using Yajnya/Yaga/Homa
(These three words are synonyms)
The ancient sages prescribed Yajnyas (sometimes written as yagyas also) as an
important part of Ayurveda. These Vedic rituals were performed by special Purohits
or priests who have been trained from an early age in the recitation of Sanskrit
mantras. Modern research has shown the remarkable effects of chanting Sanskrit on
health and well-being. The actual language of Sanskrit was engineered by Rishis to
purify and balance ones’ body, mind and the environment around us. In the Vedic
yajnyas besides the mantras, special rituals or pujas are performed to
awaken each aspect of intelligence that is underlying the universe. Even modern
physics has acknowledged these subtle laws of nature. Thousands of years ago the
Seers observed them and called them Devatas (various frequencies). After the
performance of the special rituals along with chanting, the yajnya fire is lit in a
beautiful ceremony. Fire is the vehicle of yajnya, besides the medicinal value of fire
and also, in this case, special woods and fragrant substances are offered to the
yajnya fire, the quality of fire is the transformative energy that is animating the entire
creation. By offering the sound and substances to the fire; the fire resonates and
transmits this to the subtle matter and through subtle energy and also the special
intention (or Sankalpa in Sanskrit) of the yajnya that will be supported. As per
Ayurveda, Charaka Samhita, the most ancient of Ayurvedic texts informs the
physician that when no other measures are working for a disease, yajnyas must be
performed. Many patients have reported remarkable peace of mind and deep healing
for performing them. At our Centre, we have a team of expert priests to perform the
rituals and can arrange a variety of specialized yajnyas based on your needs. Some
of the yajnyas performed are:

Mahaganapathi Homa
This is done to enhance the natural flow of our lives and removes any difficulties that
we are presently facing, be they physical, mental or emotional. Ganapathi or
Ganesha is the aspect of our physiology related to the root energy that allows us to
achieve our desires and have worldly and spiritual success. For all activities to
succeed one should bow to this quality of Ganesha. Mahaganapathi havan is
performed to ward off any obstacles at the beginning of any new venture.
In this Yajnya a special mantra from the Rig Veda is chanted, which has a profound
effect in healing diseases and purifying the heart and mind. This is often performed
for chronic and incurable diseases to bring relief to the condition. In conjunction with
Ayurvedic treatments such as Panchakarma, this yajnya can speed up the recovery
process.

P a g e |​ 48

Various other homas can be arranged on request by our expert priests. All homas are
performed at our beautiful and lush campus and are done as per Vedic tradition.

Ayurvedic treatment using Mantra
(HEALING THROUGH MANTRA)
Mantra is a Sanskrit word meaning, “by constant repetition it will give the desired
result” The other synonym is Japa Chikitsa means treatment Mantra Chikitsa is a
Vedic tradition inherent in Ayurveda as part of treating the disease at its Karmic root.
The destined path for individuals sojourn may be to manifest some diseases and go
through sufferings.
This can be identified through Astrology by reading one’s birth chart.

Mantra may be of different kinds
A. Beeja Mantras:
These are in reference to various sounds relating to different Chakras, such as
Lam, Vam Ram etc, Different chakras govern different organs in the body.
Based on which organ is affected and which the corresponding chakra is out
of balance these Beeja Mantras help balance the frequencies between the
organ and the chakra thereby helping the healing process.
B. Planetary Mantras:
These mantras or prayers in the manner of short verses are chanted
repeatedly to pacify the malefic effects of a particular planet, which in turn will
have a curative effect on the disease or suffering.

P a g e |​ 49

C. Worshiping different deities:
This is one of fascinating discoveries of the ancient seers of the Vedic times.
The Seers saw the universe and all the animate and inanimate things within it
as a gigantic living entity and identified different functionalities as governed
by different frequencies and later gave forms and shapes to it as various
deities so that it is easier to concentrate on while chanting various Mantras
and verses particular to that frequency.
This principle evolved during the millennia into worshipping various deities to get
desired results.
These practices will lead to either erase or dilute the Karmic imprints there by taking
one’s soul closer and closer to complete surrender and liberation.
Remember the body is a wound of the mind. As long as there is mind (ego) there is
a body and as long as there is a body, the disease is its shadow.
Mantra Chikitsa’s goal is to have the profound effect at the deepest caverns of the
soul and take it in the path of liberation and relieve once for all from all sufferings.
At our Indus Valley Ayurvedic Centre, we bring this ancient wisdom alive once again.
This healing tradition is quite intricate and complex. It requires in-depth knowledge
and expertise to advise the right Mantra. The astrologer after checking the birth chart
could initiate the right Mantra.

Ayurveda treatment using Color Therapy

P a g e |​ 50

Each day of the week is governed by a different planet. Each planet has a special
affinity for a particular color through which it transmits its influence around that
color. Wearing a dress, which has that particular color in various shades and designs
helps bring harmony with the planetary effects on the person.
These effects could be very subtle such as removal of obstructions and delays,
bringing better harmony and success in one’s life and helps life to move smoothly.
Better relationships, less stress, and better romance are other benefits.
One could have a wardrobe with many designs and colors.

Ayurveda treatment using Gem Therapy
Wearing different gems for the healing purpose has been a tradition in many parts of
the world. In the Vedic tradition, there are nine gems representing nine planets. After
studying one’s birth chart, an astrologer could advise the right king of gems. There
are several steps in wearing a gem correctly. Once a size of the gem is suggested, it
has to be set in a particular metal such as gold, silver or copper and should be worn
on a finger specific to that planet. At our Centre, we provide this service. Wearing a
gem will have an effect on your health and destiny.
Following are the gems for each planet.
● Red Ruby — Sun
● Pearl — Moon
● Red Coral — Mars
● Emerald — Mercury
● Yellow sapphire — Jupiter
● Diamond — Venus
● Blue sapphire — Saturn
● Cat’s eye — Ketu
● Gomedh — Rahu

Ayurvedic treatment using Sound Therapy
It was revealed by the Vedic Seers that the first step in the creation of the Universe
was the sound from the pure consciousness (JYOTHI). This sound (NADA)) is known
as the primordial sound OM.
There are many Ragas (tones), which have a profound effect on our health. Using
them effectively as a medium for healing is known as Sound Therapy or Music
Therapy. Music (sound) has the power to cure, to make you feel happy, sad,
disgusted and so on. The Ragas emerge as the suggestive sound images of these
sentiments, emotions, and passions. Properly used, It should bring generosity, joy,
and love on those who listen to the sound whether it is instrumental or Vocal or
both. When we use sound coupled with intention, which is the most important

P a g e |​ 51

aspect of healing, we can direct sound vibration to raise the body’s vibrational
frequency. Healing through sound and vibration has been known to reduce stress,
improve concentration, reduce blood pressure, stimulate the flow of life force in the
body, improve immunity, harmonize the chakras with the energy field, heighten
intuition and perception, synchronize brain hemispheres, remove mental and
emotional negativity and enhance creativity, At the center, we play OM sound
throughout the property and play it in the treatment rooms. Our singing bowels
produce deep and highly effective OM sound in the treatment rooms. There are
Ragas recorded available in CDs for different parts of the day and seasons to
balance the Vata, Pitta, and Kapha. Sound therapy is a powerful tool in healing. More
details are beyond the scope of this information booklet.

Ayurvedic treatments using Aroma Therapy
The theory behind aromatherapy
It is believed that the inhalation of essential oils stimulates the part of the brain
connected to smell - the olfactory system; a signal is sent to the limbic system of the
brain that controls emotions and retrieves learned memories. This causes chemicals
to be released which make the person feel relaxed, calm, or even stimulated. If the
aromatherapy includes massage the effect is to further relax the person.
Aromatherapy could be either through aerial diffusion, direct inhalation or topical
application.
Essential oils specific to your constitution, Vata, Pitta or Kapha when used through a
diffuser will balance and strengthen the doshas. At our Centre, we keep the dosha
specific oils and aroma diffusers at our gift shop.

Essential oils for Vata dosha balancing:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Basil
Bay
Cinnamon
Citrus
Cloves
Frankincense
Lavender
Pine
Sage
Vanilla
Amber
Angelica
Anise

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Bergamot
Camphor
Cardamom
Chamomile
Cinnamon
Clary coriander
Eucalyptus
Frankincense
Geranium
Jasmine
Jatamansi
Lemongrass
Myrrh

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Neroli
Patchouli
Rose
Rosewood
Sandalwood
Sweet orange
Tangerine
Thyme
Vanilla
Vetiver
Ylang-ylang

P a g e |​ 52

Essential oils for Pitta dosha balancing
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Birch
Brahmi
Chamomile
Champa
Clary sage
Coriander
Fennel
Geranium
Jasmine
Jatamansi

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Lavender
Lemon balm
Lemongrass
Lime
Mandarin
Myrtle
Neroli
Peppermint
Petitgrain

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Rose
Sandalwood
Spearmint
Tangerine
Tea tree
Vanilla
Wintergreen
Yarrow
Ylang-ylang

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Marjoram
Neroli
Myrrh
Myrtle
Petitgrain
Peppermint
Rose
Rosemary
Sage
Sweet orange
Tea tree
Wintergreen
Yarrow

Essential oils for Kapha dosha balancing
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Angelica
Anise
Basil
Bay
Bergamot
Birch
Camphor
Cardamom
Cedarwood
Cinnamon
Clary sage
Clove
Cypress

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Eucalyptus
Fir
Frankincense
Geranium
Ginger
Grapefruit
Hyssop
Jasmine
Juniper
Lavender
Lemon
Lemongrass
Lime

Benefits of Aromatherapy
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Anxiety
Stress
Insomnia
Muscular Aches
Body aches
Headaches
Circulation problems
Digestive problems
Menstrual problems
Menopausal problems

P a g e |​ 53

● Depression - this study found that women with depression have their sense
of smell affected. It adds that women who receive aromatherapy and suffer
from depression may benefit from the treatment.

Ayurvedic treatments and Astrology (JYOTISH):
Astrology is a Vedic science called Jyotish. It is a blueprint of the soul’s journey.
One’s soul takes birth in a physical body based on the Karmic imprints. The life’s
journey unfolds based on the past karma. The birth chart reveals the way ahead for
the person in terms of health, relationships, finance etc. Several corrective measures
could be taken to prevent difficult situations in life. A learned Jyotish could suggest
specific remedies for these situations. In the practice of Authentic Ayurveda,
consultation with an astrologer will help to deliver holistic health and wellness. At
our center, we have learned astrologer available for consultation upon request.
Majority of our guests opt to take this consultation.

Ayurvedic treatments and Vaastu - The Indian Art of
Placement
Vaastu is a Sanskrit word meaning ‘the science of structures’. It is a traditional theory
of architecture that guides the design and construction of buildings in harmony with
the natural laws of the universe. As Einstein proved, everything in existence, sentient
and non-sentient, is ultimately a field of energy. Vastu is the pure, subtle energy that
underlies everything, while Vaastu is the manifestation or expression of that energy
as matter. Every structure whether it is a building or a fence, a statue or a piece of
furniture, a piece of music or other art form has its own subtle energy. Vaastu is the
science of working with these fields of energy, guiding us to arrange structures so
that their underlying energy fields are beneficially manipulated according to
proportion and direction.
Vaastu describes desirable window and door locations, color schemes, symbols,
artworks and furniture arrangements. It also addresses the optimum type of soil,
location of plants and water features, and construction of fences and compound
walls. The science of Vaastu is a meaningful dialogue between mind and nature,
enabling us to better understand the energy fields of various objects around us as
well as those of invisible cosmic bodies that affect our minds and bodies, influencing
our lives directly and indirectly.
Vaastu considers a dwelling to be full of life force. It informs us how to make
dwellings that have rhythm and beauty, that vibrate perfectly with nature. A
structure built according to Vaastu is a science based on Vedic mathematics, one of
the most advanced forms of knowledge in our universe. Thus the measuring system
of Vaastu is quite different from that of Feng Shui. In Vaastu, each habitation has to

P a g e |​ 54

be individualized, taking into consideration several significant factors, including
orientation, direction, proportion, and the activities performed within, and the
personalities and vocations of the inhabitants.
Today many people are fortunate to enjoy abundant physical comforts as well as a
long life, yet they feel inadequate and unhappy. They suffer from uneasiness in mind
and body and do not seem to be in a balanced state of health. Often they are not
helped by modern science, which is seriously lacking in its understanding of the
connection and complex interaction between the mind and body.
Thus, it seems appropriate to look to the ancient Indian texts, the Vedas, for some
the answers. Ved literally means ‘science’ or ‘knowledge’. The Vedas are
storehouses of knowledge concerning the intricate balance of the forces that affect
human life and all of the existence. This knowledge was revealed to humanity more
than seven thousand years ago in the Himalayas.
Despite their antiquity, the Vedas contain timeless knowledge of the expression of
consciousness that can help us find answers to our modern concerns about health
and life.
Vaastu is related to two other Vedic sciences, Jyotish (astrology) and Ayurveda.
Jyotish, the science of stars and planets and their forces teaches us about the subtle
principles that affect and govern our physical and mental aspects. Ayurveda the
science of life teaches us about the physical, physiological, and psychological
makeup of these forces. Our own physical body is a perfect Vaastu structure
transformed into a living, vibrating entity.
Vaastu the science of physical structures teaches us how to place or construct
material structures, taking into account the planetary forces and their effects on our
lives. When arranged and constructed according to these principles, our home can
be transformed into entities full of life energy. Jyotish, Vaastu, and Ayurveda work
together to help us live more harmoniously and happily. Thus, this study of Vaastu
incorporates aspects of the other two sciences as well.

Go Green Initiatives
As part of this project, we are using 100% certified herbal pesticide to control pests
in and around our buildings. It has a nice lingering fragrance and is totally harmless
to humans and it is also biodegradable. For plants and trees, we are using a nutritive
biopesticide. We only use organic manure to all our plants and trees. We also use a
Vedic formula called Jeevamrita. We are currently working on growing organic
vegetables and various organic products.

P a g e |​ 55

Our future plans are to go for recycling of water, rainwater harvesting, to be
self-sufficient with the alternative sources of energy, planting thousands of trees,
Use recycled papers and eco-friendly constructions. We request all our guests to be
a part of this mission.
This booklet copy is intended to provide information to the guests who are staying at
our Indus Valley Ayurvedic Centre. It is also available as a free ebook that you can
download from our site https://www.ayurindus.com
Copyright Reserved: © 2011-2018

P a g e |​ 56

