Stack
Annex
B

132
Y6A8
1905

YOGI RAMACHARAKA

-k i

i

^
OF

T T-"

THE HINDU- YOGI

Science of Breath
A Complete Manual

:

*

THE ORIENTAL BREATHING
PHILOSOPHY
OF
Physical, Mental, Psychic and Spiritual

Development

By YOGI RAMACHARAKA

YOGI PUBLICATION SOCIETY
MASONIC TEMPLE, CHICAGO, ILL.

London Agents:
L. N. Fowler & Co., 7 Imperial Arcade, Ludgste Circus

India Agents:
Latent Light Culture
Tinnevelly, So. India

Copyright 1904

BY THE YOGI PUBLICATION SOCIETY

Copyright 1905

BY THE YOGI PUBLICATION SOCIETY

STACK

ANNEX

3
is -e

Yt A?

INDEX.
CHAPTER I.
altam

CHAPTER II.
"Breath Is Life"

CHAPTER III.
The Exoteric Theory

of Breath

11

,

CHAPTER IV.
16

The Esoteric Thery of Breath

CHAPTER V.
The Nervous System

20

-

CHAPTER VI.
Nostril Breathing vs.

Mouth Breathing

29

CHAPTER VII.
The Four Methods of Respiration

27

CHAPTER VIII.
How to Acquire the Yogi Complete Breath

33

CHAPTER IX.
36

Physiological Effect of the Complete Breath

CHAPTER X.
A Few Bits of Yogi Lore

40

CHAPTER XI.
The Seven ?*gl Developing Exercises

,

43

CHAPTER XII.
Seven Minor Yogi Exercises

48

CHAPTER XIII.
Vibration and Yogi Rhythmic Breathing

51

CHAPTER XIV.
Phenomena of Yogi Psychic Breathing

55

CHAPTER XV.
More Phenomena of Yogi Psychic Breathing

61

CHAPTER XVI.
Yogi Spiritual Breathing

69

CHAPTER

I.

SALAAM.
The Western student is apt to be somewhat confused
Yogis and their philosophy and
Travelers to India have written great tales about
the hordes of fakirs, mendicants and mountebanks who
infest the great roads of India and the streets of its cities,
and who impudently claim the title "Yogi." The Western
student is scarcely to be blamed for thinking of the typical
Yogi as an emaciated, fanatical, dirty, ignorant Hindu, who
either sits in a fixed posture until his body becomes ossified, or else holds his arm up in the air until it becomes
stiff and withered ar.d forever after remains in that position, or perhaps clenches his fist and holds it tight until
his fingernails grow through the palms of his hands. That
these people exist is true, but their claim to the title
"Yogi" seems as absurd to the true Yogi as does the claim
to the title "Doctor" on the part of the man who pares
one's corns seem to the eminent surgeon, or as does the
title of "Professor," as assumed by the street corner vendor
of worm medicine, seem to the President of Harvard or
in his ideas regarding the

practice.

Yale.

There have been for ages past in India and other
men who devoted their time and attention to the development of Man, physically, mentally and
Oriental countries

The experience of generations of earnest seekhanded down for centuries from teacher to
pupil, and gradually a definite Yogi science was built up.
To these investigations and teachings was finally applied
the term "Yogi," from the Sanscrit word "Yug," meaning
"to join." From the same source comes the English word
spiritually.

ers has been

"yoke," with a similar meaning. Its use in connection
with these teachings is difficult to trace, different authorities giving different explanations, but probably the most
ingenious is that which holds that it I* intended as the

Hindu equivalent

for the idea conveyed

by the English

phrase, "getting into harness," or "yoking up," as the Yogi

5

SCIENCE OF BEE ATE.

t

undoubtedly "gets into harness" in his work of controlling
the body and mind by the Will.
Yoga is divided into several branches, ranging from
that which teaches the control of the body, to that which
teaches the attainment of the highest spiritual develop-

ment.

In the work we will not go into the higher phases

of the subject, except when the "Science of Breath" touches

The "Science of Breath" touches Yoga at
and although chiefly concerned with the
development and control of the physical, has also its
psychic side, and even enters the field of spiritual developupon the same.

many

points,

ment.
In India there are great schools of Yoga, comprising
thousands of the leading minds of that great country. The

Yoga philosophy is the rule of life for many people. The
pure Yogi teachings, however, are given only to the few,
the masses being satisfied with the crumbs which fall from
the tables of the educated classes, the Oriental custom in
opposed to that of the Western world.
But Western ideas are beginning to have their effect even
in the Orient, and teachings which were once given only
to the few are now freely offered to any who are ready
The East and the West are growing
to receive them.
this respect being

and both are profiting by the
each influencing the other.
closer together,

close

contact,

The Hindu Yogis have always paid great attention to
the Science of Breath, for reasons which will be apparent
to the student who reads this book.
Many Western writers
have touched upon this phase of the Yogi teachings, but

we believe that it has been reserved for the writer of this
work to give to the Western student, in concise form and
simple language, the underlying principles of the Yogi
Science of Breath, together with many of the favorite Yogi
breathing exercises and methods. We have given the
Western idea as well as the Oriental, showing how one
dovetails into the other. We have used the ordinary English terms, almost entirely, avoiding the Sanscrit terms, so
confusing to the average Western reader.
Th first part of tha book is devoted to the physical
phase of the Science of Breath; then the psychic and

SCIENCE OF BREATH.
mental sides
Is

are

considered,

touched upon.
We may be pardoned

and
if

finally

we

the

'

spiritual

express ourselves

side

as

pleased with our success in condensing so much Yogi lore
into so few pages, and by the use of words and terms
which may be understood by anyone. Our only fear is

that its very simplicity may cause some to pass it by as
unworthy of attention, while they pass on their way searching for something "deep," mysterious and non-understandable.
However, the Western mind is eminently practical,
and we know that it is only a question of a short time

before it will recognize the practicability of this work.

We greet our students, with our most profound salaam,
and bid them be seated for their first lessons in the Yogi
Science of Breatn.

CHAPTER II.
"BREATH IS LIFE."
Life is absolutely dependent upon the act of breathing.

"Breath is Life."
Differ as they

may upon details of theory and
terminology, the Oriental and the Occidental agree upon
these fundamental principles.
To breathe is to live, and without breath there is no
Not only are the higher animals dependent upon
life and health, but even the lower forms of
animal life must breathe to live, and plant life is likewise
dependent upon the air for continued existence.
The infant draws in a long, deep breath, retains it for
a moment to extract from it its life-giving properties, and
then exhales it in a long wail, and lo! its life upon earth
life.

breath for

has begun. The old man gives a faint gasp, ceases to
breathe, and life is over. From the first faint breath of
the infant to the last gaso of the dying man, it is one long
story of
breaths,

continued breathing.

Life

ir

but a

series

of

Breathing may be considered the most important of all
of the functions of the body, for, indeed, all the other functions

depend upon it

Man may exist some time without

eating; a shorter time without drinking; but without breathing his existence may be measured by a few minutes.

And not only is Man dependent upon Breath for life,
but he is largely dependent upon correct habits of breathing for continued vitality and freedom from disease. An
intelligent control of our breathing power will lengthen
our days upon earth by giving us increased vitality and
powers of resistance, and, on the other hand, unintelligent
and careless breathing will tend to shorten our days, by
decreasing our vitality and laying us open to disease.
Man in his normal state had no need of instruction in
breathing. Like the lower animal and the child, he
breathed naturally and properly, as nature intended him
to do, but civilization has changed him in this and other

SCIENCE OF BREATB.

He has contracted improper methods and attirespects.
tudes of walking, standing and sitting, which have robbed
him of his birthright of natural and correct breathing. He
has paid a high price for civilization. The savage, to-day,
breathes naturally, unless he has been contaminated by
the habits of civilized man.
The percentage of civilized men who breathe correctly
is quite small, and the result is shown in contracted chests
and stooping shoulders, and the terrible increase in diseases
of the respiratory organs, including that dread monster,
Consumption, "the white scourge." Eminent authorities
have stated that one generation of correct breathers would
regenerate the race, and disease would be so rare as to be
looked upon as a curiosity. Whether looked at from the
standpoint of the Oriental or Occidental, the connection
between correct breathing and health is readily seen and
explained.
Tha Occidental teachings show that the physical health

very materially upon correct breathing. The
Oriental teachers not only admit that their Occidental
brothers are right, but say that in addition to the physical
benefit derived from correct habits of breathing, Man's

depends

mental

power,

happiness,

self-control,

clear-sightedness,

and even his spiritual growth may be increased by
f morals,
understanding of the "Science of Breath." Whole
.aji
Philosophy have been founded upon
and this knowledge when grasped by the
Western races, and by them put to the practical use which
The
is their strong point, will work wonders among them.
theory of the East, wedded to the practice of the West, will
produce worthy offspring.
This work will take up the Yogi "Science of Breath,"
which includes not only all that is known to the Western
physiologist and hygienist, but the occult side of the subject
schools of Oriental
this

scier ^e,

as well. It not only points out the way to physical health
along the lines of what,, Western scientists have termed
"deep breathing," etc., but also goes into the less known
phases of the subject, and shows how the Hindu Yogi con-

mental capacity, and develops
the spiritual side of his nature by the "Science of Breath."

trols his body, increasing his

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

10

The Yogi practices exercises by which he attains conbody, and is enabled to send to any organ or

trol of his

part an increased flow of vital force or "prana," thereby
strengthening and invigorating the part, or organ. He
knows all that his Western scientific brother knows about
the physiological effect of correct breathing, but he also

knows that the air contains more than oxygen and hydrogen and nitrogen, and that something more is accomplished
than the mere oxygenating of the blood. He knows something about '^DjCauR," of which his Western brother is
ignorant, and he is fully aware of the nature and manner
of handling that great principle of energy, and is fully intormed as to its effect upon the human body and mind. He
knows that by rhythmical breathing one may bring himself into harmonious vibration with nature, and aid in the
unfoldment of his latent powers. He knows that by controlled breathing he may not only cure disease in himself
and others, but also practically do away with fear and
worry and the baser emotions.

To teach these things is the object of this work. We
few chapters concise explanations and in-

will give in' a

which might be extended into volumes. We
hope to awaken the minds of the Western world to the
value of the Yogi "Science of Breath."

structions,

CHAPTER III.
THE EXOTERIC THEORY OF BREATH.
In this chapter we will give you briefly the theories
of the Western scientific world regarding the functions of
the respiratory organs, and the part in the human economy
played by the breath. In subsequent chapters we will
give the additional theories and ascertained facts of the
school of thought and research. The Oriental
accepts the theories and facts of his Western brothers
(which have been known to him for centuries) and adds
thereto much that the latter do not now accept, but which
they will in due time "discover" and which, after renaming, they will present to the world as a great truth.
Before taking up the Western idea, it will perhaps be
better to give a hasty general idea of the Organs of Respi-

Oriental

ration.

The Organs of Respiration consist of the lungs and
the air passages leading to them. The lungs are two in
number, and occupy the pleural chamber of the thorax, one
on each side of the median line, being separated from each
other by the heart, the greater blood vessels and the larger

Each lung is free in all directions, except at the
which consists chiefly of the bronchi, arteries and
veins connecting the lungs with the trachea and heart.
The lungs are spongy and porous, and their tissues are

air tubes.
root,

elastic.
They are covered with a delicately constructed but strong sac, known as the pleural sac, one wall

very

of which closely adheres to the lung,

and the other to the
inner wall of the chest, and which secretes a fluid which
allows the inner surfaces of the walls to glide easily upon
each other in the act of breathing.

The Air Passages consist of the interior of the nose,
pharynx, larynx, windpipe or trachea, and the bronchial
tubes. When we breathe, we draw i-? the air through the
nose, in which it is warmed by contact with the mucous
membrane, which is richly supplied with blood, and after
it has passed through the pharnyx and larynx U passes
11

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

12

into the trachea or windpipe, which subdivides into numer-

ous tubes called the bronchial tubes (bronchia), which in
turn subdivide into and terminate in minute subdivisions
in all the small air spaces in the lungs, of

contain millions.

which the lungs

A writer has stated that if the air cells

of the lungs were spread out over an unbroken surface,
they would cover an area of fourteen thousand square feet.
The air is drawn into the lungs by the action of the

diaphragm, a great, strong, flat, sheet-like muscle, stretched
across the chest, separating the chest-box from the abdomen. The diaphragm's action is almost as automatic as
that of the heart, although it may be transformed into a
semi-voluntary muscle by an effort of the will. When it
expands, it increases the size of the chest and lungs, and
the air rushes into the vacuum thus created. When it
relaxes the chest and lungs contract and the air is expelled

from the lungs.

Now, before considering what happens to the air in
the lungs, let us look a little into the matter of the circulation of the blood. The blood, as you know, is driven by
the heart, through the arteries, into the capillaries, thus
reaching every part of the body, which it vitalizes, nourishes

and strengthens. It then returns by means of the
by another route, the veins, to the heart, from

capillaries

whence it is drawn to the lungs.
The blood starts on its arterial journey, bright red
and rich, laden with life-giving qualities and properties.
It returns by the venous route, poor, blue and dull, being
laden down with the waste matter of the system. It goes
out like a fresh stream from the mountains; it returns as
a stream of sewer water. This foul stream goes to the
When this auricle becomes
right auricle of the heart.
filled, it contracts and forces the stream of blood through
an opening in the right ventricle of the heart, which in
turn sends it on to the lungs, where it is distributed by
millions of hair-like blood vessels to the air cells of the
lungs, of which we have spoken. Now, let us take up the
story of the lungs at this point.
The foul stream of blood is now distributed among the
millions of tiny air cells in the lungs.

A breath of air is

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

13

inhaled and the oxygen of the air comes in contact with
the impure blood through the thin walls of the hair-like
blood vessels of the lungs, which walls are thick enough
to hold the blood, but thin enough to

admit the oxygen to

penetrate them. When the oxygen comes in contact with
the blood, a form of combustion takes place, and the blood
takes up oxygen and releases carbonic acid gas generated

from the waste products and poisonous matter which has
been gathered up by the blood from all parts of the system.
blood

"The
the

heart,

thus

purified

again

rich,

and oxygenated is
and bright, and

red

back

carried

laden

with

to
life-

giving properties and qualities. Upon reaching the left
auricle of the heart, it is forced into the left ventricle, from
1

whence it is again forced out through the arteries on its
mission of life to all parts of the system. It is estimated
that in a single day of twenty-four hours, 35,000 pints of
blood traverse the capillaries of the lungs, the blood
corpuscles passing in single file and being exposed to the
oxygen of the air on both of their surfaces. When one
considers the minute details of the process alluded to, he
is lost in wonder and admiration at Nature's infinite care
and intelligence.

be seen that unless fresh air in sufficient quanreaches the lungs, the foul stream of venous blood
cannot be purified, and consequently not only is the body
thus robbed of nourishment, but the waste products which
should have been destroyed are returned to the circulation and poison the system, and death ensues.
Impure air
It will

tities

acts

in

the

same

also

be

seen

that

tity

of

air,

the

and

the

result

It
will
way, only in a lessened degree.
one does not breathe in a sufficient quanwork of the blood cannot go on properly,
if

is

that

the

body

is

insufficiently

nourished

and disease ensues, or a state of imperfect health is experienced. The blood of one who breathes improperly is,
of course, of a bluish, dark color, lacking the rich redness
of pure arterial blood. This often shows itself in a poor

complexion.

Proper breathing, and a consequent good cir-

culation, results in a clear, bright complexion.
little reflection will show the vital importance of
If the blood is not fully purified by the
Correct breathing.

A

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

14

regenerative process of the lungs, it returns to the arteries
in an abnormal state, insufficiently purified and imperfectly
cleansed of the impurities which it took up on its return
journey. These impurities if returned to the system will
certainly manifest in some form of disease, either in a form
of blood disease or some disease resulting from impaired

functioning of some insufficiently nourished organ or tissue.
The blood, when properly exposed to the air in the
lungs, not only has its impurities consumed, and parts with
its noxious carbonic acid gas, but it also takes up and

absorbs a certain quantity of oxygen which it carries to all
parts of the body, where it is needed in order that Nature
may perform her processes properly. When the oxygen

comes

in

contact with

the

blood,

it

unites

with the

haemoglobin of the blood and is carried to every cell, tissue,
muscle and organ, which it invigorates and strengthens,
replacing the wornout cells and tissue by new materials
which Nature converts to her use. Arterial blood, properly

exposed to the air, contains about 25 per cent of free
oxygen.
Not only is every part vitalized by the oxygen, but the
act of digestion depends materially upon a certain amounf
of oxygenation of the food, and this can be accomplished
only by the oxygen in the blood coming in contact with the
food and producing a certain form of combustion. It is
therefore necessary that a proper supply of oxygen be
taken through the lungs. This accounts for the fact that
weak lungs and poor digestion are so often found together.
To grasp the full significance of this statement, one must
remember that the entire body receives nourishment from
the food assimilated, and that imperfect assimilation always means an imperfectly nourished body. Even the
lungs themselves depend upon the same source for nourishment, and if through imperfect breathing the assimilation
becomes imperfect, and the lungs in turn become weakened,
they are rendered still less able to perform their work
properly, and so in turn the body becomes further weakened. Every particle of food and drink must be oxygenated before it can yield us the proper nourishment, and
before the waste products of the system can be reduced to

SCIENCE OF BREATH.
the

proper

condition

to

be

eliminated

from

15
the

system.

Lack of sufficient oxygen means imperfect nutrition, imperfect elimination and imperfect health. Verily, "breath
is life."

The combustion arising from the change in the waste
products generates heat and equalizes the temperature of
the body. Good breathers are not apt to "take cold," and
they generally have plenty of good warm blood whicn
enables them to resist the changes in the outer temperature.

In addition to the above-mentioned important processes,
the act of breathing gives exercise to the internal organs

and muscles, which feature is generally overlooked by the
Western writers on the subject, but which the Yogis fully
appreciate.

In imperfect or shallow breathing, only a portion of
the lung cells are brought into play, and a great portion of
the lung capacity is lost, the system suffering in proportion
to the amount of under-oxygenation.
The lower animals,
in their native state, breathe naturally,

and primitive man

undoubtedly did the same. The abnormal manner of living adopted by civilized man the shadow that follows upon
civilization
has robbed us of our natural habit of breathMan's only
ing, and the race has greatly suffered thereby.
physical salvation is to "get back to Nature."

CHAPTER

IV.

THE ESOTEEIC THEOEY OF BBEATH.
Its

The Science of Breath, like many other teachings, haa
esoteric or inner phase, as well as its exoteric or ex-

ternal.
The physiological phase may be termed the outer
or exoteric side of the subject, and the phase which we will

now consider may be termed its esoteric or inner side.
Occultists, in all ages and lands, have always taught,
usually secretly to a few followers, that there was to be
found in the air a substance or principle from which all
They differed In
activity, vitality and life was derived.
their terms and names for this force, as well as in the
details of the theory, but the main principle Is to be
in all occult teachings

turies

found

and philosophies, and has for cen-

formed a portion of the teachings of the Oriental

Yogis.

In order to avoid misconceptions arising from the
various theories regarding this great principle, which
theories are usually attached to some name given the principle, we, in this work, will speak of the principle as
"Prana," this word being the Sanscrit term meaning "Absolute Energy." Many occult authorities teach that the
principle which the Hindus term "Prana" is the universal
principle of energy or force, and that all energy or force is
derived from that principle, or, rather, is a particular form
of manifestation of that principle. These theories do not
concern us in the consideration of the subject matter of
this work, and we will therefore confine ourselves to an understanding of prana as the principle of energy exhibited
in all living things, which distinguishes them from a lifeless thing.
We may consider it as the active principle of
life

of

Vital Force, if you please. It is found in all forms
from the amoeba to man from the most ele-

life,

mentary form of plant life to the highest form of animal
life.
Prana is all pervading. It is found in all things having life, and as the occult philosophy teaches that life is in
in every atom
the apparent lifelessness of
*11 things
16

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

17

some things being only a lesser degree of manifestation,

we may understand their teachings that prana is everywhere, in everything. Prana must not be confounded
with the Ego that bit of Divine Spirit in every soul,
around which clusters matter and energy. Prana is merely
a form of energy used by the Ego in its material manifestation.
When the Ego leaves the body, the prana, being
no longer under its control, responds only to the orders of
the individual atoms, or groups of atoms, forming the body,
and as the body disintegrates and is resolved to its original
elements, each atom takes with it sufficient prana to enable
it to form new combinations, the unused prana returning
to the great universal storehouse from which it came.
With the Ego in control, cohesion exists and the atoms are
held together by the Will of the Ego.
Prana is the name by which we designate a universal
principle, which principle is the essence of all motion, force
or energy, whether manifested in gravitation, electricity,
the revolution of the planets, and all forms of life, from
the highest to the lowest. It may be called the soul of
Force and Energy in all their forms, and that principle
which, operating in a certain way, causes that form of
activity which

accompanies Life.

This great principle is in all forms of matter, and yet
It is in the air, but it is not the air nor
it Is not matter.

one of its chemical constituents. Animal and plant life
breathe it in with the air, and yet if the air contained it not
they would die even though they might be filled with air.
It Is taken up by the system along with the oxygen, and
yet is not the oxygen^) The Hebrew writer of the book of
Genesis knew the difference between the atmospheric air
ind the mysterious and potent principle contained within
it.
He speaks of neshemet ruach chayim, which, transIn the
lated, means "the breath of the spirit of life."
Hebrew neshemet means the ordinary breath of atmospheric air, and chayim means life or lives, while the word
ruach means the "spirit of life," which occultists claim is
the same principle which we speak of as Prana.
Prana is in the atmospheric air, but it is also elsejrnere, and it penetrates where the air cannot reach. The

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

gg

oxygen in the air plays an important part in sustaining
animal life, and the carbon plays a similar part with plant
life, but Prana has its own distinct part to play in the
manifestation of life, aside from the physiological functions.

We are constantly inhaling the air charged with prana,
and are as constantly extracting the latter from the air and
appropriating it to our uses. Prana is found in its freest
state in the atmospheric air, which when fresh is fairly
charged with it, and we draw it to us more easily from
the air than from any other source. In ordinary breathing
we abs-^?b and extract a normal supply of prana, but by
controlled and regulated breathing (generally known as
Yogi breathing) we are enabled to extract a greater supply,
which is stored away in the brain and nerve centers, to
be used when necessary. We may store away prana, just
as the storage battery stores away electricity. The many
powers attributed to advanced occultists is due largely to
their knowledge of this fact and their intelligent use of
stored-up energy. The Yogis know that by certain
forms of breathing they establish certain relations with
the supply of prana and may draw on the same for what
they require. Not only do they strengthen all parts of their
body in this way, but the brain itself may receive increased energy from the same source, and latent faculties
be developed and psychic powers attained. One who has
mastered the science of storing away prana, either conradiates vitality and
sciously or unconsciously, often
strength which is felt by those coming in contact with him,
and such a person may impart this strength to others, and
What is called
give them increased vitality and health.

this

"magnetic healing"

is

performed in

this

way, although

many practitioners are not aware of the source of their
power.

Western scientists have been dimly aware of this great
principle with which the air is charged, but finding that
they could find no chemical trace of it, or make it register

on any of their instruments, they have generally treated
-the Oriental theory with disdain. They could not explain
this

principle,

and

so

denied

it.

They seem, however,

to

SCIENCE OF BBEATH.

19

recognize that the air In certain places possesses a greater
sick people are directed by
their physicians to seek such places in hopes of regaining

amount of "something" and
lost health.

is

The oxygen in the air is appropriated by the blood and
made use of by the circulatory system. The prana in

the air

appropriated by the nervous system, and is used
And as the oxygenated blood is carried to all
parts of the system, building up and replenishing, so is the
is

in its work.

carried to all parts of the nervous system, adding
If we think of prana as being the
strength and vitality.
active principle of what we call "vitality," we' will be

prana

form a much clearer idea of what an important part
Just as is the oxygen in the blood
plays in our livea
used up by the wants of the system, so the supply of prana
able to
it

taken up by the nervous system
ing, willing, acting, etc.,

and

is

exhausted by our think-

in consequence constant replenthought, every act, every effort

Every
ishing is necessary.
of the will, every motion of

a muscle, uses up a certain
amount of what we call nerve force, which is really a form
To move a muscle the brain sends out an imof prana.
pulse over the nerves, and the muscle contracts, and so
much prana is expended. When it is remembered that the
greater portion of prana acquired by man comes to Him
from the air inhaled, the importance of proper breathing
.is

readily understood.

CHAPTBR V.
THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
It will be noticed that the Western scientific theories
regarding the breath confine themselves to the effects of
the absorption of oxygen, and its use through the circulatory system, while the Yogi theory also takes into consideration the absorption of Prana, and its manifestation
through the channels of the Nervous System. Before proceeding further, it may be as well to take a hasty glance
at the Nervous System.
The Nervous System of man is divided into two great
systems, viz., the Cerebro-Spinal System and the Sympa-

thetic System. The Cerebro-Spinal System consists of all
that part of the Nervous System contained within the
cranial cavity and the spinal canal, viz., the brain and the
spinal cord, together with the nerves which branch off
from the same. This system presides over the functions
of animal life known as volition, sensation, etc. The Sympathetic System includes all that part of the Nervous
System located principally in the thoracic, abdominal and
pelvic cavities, and which is distributed to the internal
It has control over the involuntary processes,
organs.
such as growth, nutrition, etc.
The Cerebro-Spinal System attends to all the seeing,

hearing, tasting, smelling, feeling, etc.
motion; it is used by the Ego to think

It sets things in

to manifest coninstrument with which the Ego communicates with the outside world. This system may be
likened to a telephone system, with the brain as the central office, and the spinal column and nerves as cable and
wires respectively.
The brain is a great mass of nerve tissue, and consists of three parts, viz., the Cerebrum or brain proper,
whict occupies the upper, front, middle and back portion
or the skull; the Cerebellum, or "little brain," which fills
the lower and back portion of the skull; and the Medulla
sciousness.

It is the

20

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

21

Oblongata, which is the broadened commencement of the
spinal cord, lying before and in front of the Cerebellum.
The Cerebrum is the organ of that part of the mind

which manifests

itself

in intellectual action.

The Cere-

bellum regulates the movements of the voluntary musThe Medulla Oblongata is the upper enlarged end of
cles.
the spinal cord, and from it and the Cerebrum branch
forth the Cranial Nerves which reach to various parts of
the head, to the organs of special sense, and to some of the
thoracic and abdominal organs, and to the organs of respiration.

The Spinal Cord, or spinal marrow, fills the spinal
canal in the vertebral column, or "backbone." It is a long
mass of nerve tissue, branching off at the several vertebrae
to nerves communicating with all parts of the body. The
Spinal Cord is like a large telephone cable, and the emerging nerves are like the private wires connecting therewith.
The Sympathetic Nervous System consists of a double
chain of Ganglia on the side of the Spinal column, and
scattered ganglia in the head, neck, chest and abdomen.
(A ganglion is a mass of nervous matter including nerve
These ganglia are connected with each other by
cells.)
filaments, and are also connected with the Cerebro Spinal
From these ganSystem bj motor and sensory nerves.
branch
fibers
out
to
the
of the body,
numerous
organs
glia
At various points, the nerves meet
blood vessels, etc.
The
together and form what are known as plexuses.
Sympathetic
processes,

System
such

as

practically
circulation,

controls

the

respiration

involuntary

and

diges-

tion.

The power or force transmitted from the brain to all
parts of the body by means of the nerves, is known to
Western science as "nerve force," although the Yogi knows
In character and rapidresembles the electric current. It will be seen that
without this "nerve force" the heart cannot beat; the
blood cannot circulate; the lungs cannot breathe; the various organs cannot function; in fact the machinery of the
body comes to a stop without it. Nay more, even the
brain cannot think without Prana be present. When these

it

to be a manifestation of Prana.

ity it

22

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

facts are considered, the importance of the absorption ot
Prana must be evident to all, and the Science of Breath

assumes an importance even greater than that accorded
by Western science.
The Yogi teachings go further than does Western
science, in one important feature of the Nervous System.
We allude to what Western science terms the "Solar
Plexus," and which it considers as merely one of a series
of certain matte'd nets of sympathetic nerves with their
ganglia found in various parts of the body. Yogi science
teaches that this Solar Plexus is really a most important
part of the Nervous System, and that it is a form of brain,
it

playing one of the principal parts in the human economy.
Western science seems to be moving gradually towards a
recognition of this fact which has been known to the Yogis
of the East for centuries, and some recent Western writers have termed the Solar Plexus the "Abdominal Brain."
The Solar Plexus is situated in the Epigastric region, just
back of the "pit of the stomach" on either side of the
It is composed of white and gray brain
spinal column.
matter, similar to that composing the other brains of man.
It has control of the main internal organs of man, and
plays a much more important part than is generally recWe will not go into the Yogi theory regarding
ognized.
the Solar Plexus, further than to say that they know it as
the great central store-house of Prana.
Men have been
known to be instantly killed by a severe blow over the
Solar Plexus, and prize fighters recognize its vulnerability
and frequently temporarily paralyze their opponents by a
blow over this region.
The name "Solar" is well bestowed' on this "brain,"
as it radiates strength and energy to all parts of the body,
even the upper brains depending largely upon it as a storehouse of Prana. Sooner or later Western science will fully
recognize the real function of the Solar Plexus, and will
accord to it a far more important place then it now occupies in their text-books and teachings.

CHAPTER VI.
NOSTKIL-BEEATHING

VS.

MOUTH-BREATHING.

One of the first lessons in the Yogi Science of Breath,
is to learn how to breathe through the nostrils, and to overcome the common practice of mouth-breathing.
The breathing mechanism of Man is so constructed
that he may breathe either through the mouth or nasal
tubes, but it is a matter of vital importance to him which
method he follows, as one brings health and strength and
the other disease and weakness.

It should not be necessary to state to the student that
the proper method of breathing is to take the breath
through the nostrils, but alas! the ignorance among civil-

ized

people regarding this simple matter

is

astounding.

We find people in all walks of life habMufUly breathing
through their mouths, and allowing their cnildren to follow their horrible and disgusting example.
Many of the diseases to which civilized man is subject
are undoubtedly caused by this common habit of mouthbreathing.

Children permitted to breathe in this way grow

up with impaired vitality and weakened constitutions, and
in manhood and womanhood break down and become
chronic invalids. The mother of the savage race does betShe seem?
ter, being evidently guided by her intuition.
to instinctively recognize that the nostrils are the propey
channels for the conveyal of air to the lungs, and she trains
her infant to close its little lips and breathe through the

She tips its head forward when it is asleep, which
and makes nostril-breathing imperIf our civilized mothers were to adopt the same
ative.
plan, it would work a great good for the race.
Many contagious diseases are contracted by the disgusting habit of mouth-breathing, and many cases of cold
and catarrhal affections are also attributable to the san?
cause.
Many persons who, for the sake of appearances,
keep their mouth closed during the day, persist in mouthbreathing at night and often contract disease in this waj.

nose.

attitude closes the lips

00,

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

%4

scientific
have
conducted
shown
Carefully
experiments
that soldiers and sailors who sleep with their mouths open

much more liable to contract contagious diseases than
those who breathe properly through the nostrils. An instance is related in which small-pox became epidemic on

art

a man-of-war in foreign parts, and every death which
resulted was that of some sailor or marine who was a
mouth-breather, not a single nostril-breather succumbing.

The organs of respiration have their only protective
When
apparatus, filter, or dust-catcher, in the nostrils.
the breath is taken through the mouth, there is nothing
from mouth to lungs to strain the air, or to catch the dust
and other foreign matter in the air. From mouth to lungs
the dirt or impure substance has a clear track, and the
entire respiratory system is unprotected.
And, moreover,
such incorrect breathing admits cold air to the organs,

thereby injuring them. Inflammation of the respiratory
organs often results from the inhalation of cold air through
The man who breathes through the mouth
the mouth.
at night, always awakens with a parched feeling in the
mouth and a dryness in the throat. He is violating one of
nature's laws, and is sowing the seeds of disease.
Once more, remember that the mouth affords no protection to the respiratory organs, and cold air, dust and
impurities and germs readily enter by that door. On the
other hand, the nostrils and nasal passages show evidence
of the careful design of nature in this respect. The nostrils are two narrow, tortuous channels, containing numerous bristly hairs which serve the purpose of a filter or
sieve to strain the air of its impurities, etc., which are
Not only do the nosexpelled when the breath is exhaled.
trils serve this important purpose, but they also perform
an important function in warming the air inhaled. The
long narrow winding nostrils are filled with warm mucous
membrane, which coming in contact with the inhaled air
warms it so that it can do no damage to the delicate organs

of the throat, or to the lungs.

No animal, excepting man, sleeps with the mouth open
or

breathes

ihat

it

is

through the mouth, and in fact

only civilized

it

is

believed

man who so perverts nature's func-

SCIENCE OF BREATH.
savage and barbarian races almost invariably
breathe correctly. It is probable that this unnatural habft
among civilized men has been acquired through unnatural
methods of living, enervating luxuries and excessive
tieas, as the

warmth.

The refining, filtering and straining apparatus of the
nostrils renders the air fit to reach the delicate organs of
the throat and the lungs, and the air is not fit to so reach
these organs until

it

has passed through nature's

refin-

ing process. The impurities which are stopped and retained
by the sieves and mucous membrane of the nostrils, are

thrown out again by the expelled breath, in exhalation,
and in case they have accumulated too rapidly or have
managed to escape through the sieves and have penetrated
forbidden regions, nature protects us by producing a sneeze
which violently ejects the intruder.
The air, when it enters the lungs is as different from
the outside air, as is distilled water different from the
water of the cistern. The intricate purifying organization
of the nostrils, arresting and holding the impure particles
important as is the action of the mouth
stopping cherry-stones and fish-bones and preventing
them from being carried on to the stomach. Man shouTd\
no more breathe through his mouth than he would attempt/
to take food through his nose.
Another feature of mouth-breathing is that the nasal
passages, being thus comparatively unused, consequently
fail to keep themselves clean and clear, and become clogged
up and unclean, and are apt to contract local diseases.
Like abandoned roads that soon become filled with weeds
in the air, is as
in

and rubbish, unused nostrils become filled with impurities
and foul matter.

One who habitually breathes through the nostrils is
not likely to be troubled with clogged or stuffy nostrils,
but for the benefit of those who have been more or less
addicted to the unnatural mouth-breathing, and who wish
to acquire the natural and rational method, it may perhaps be well to add a few words regarding the way t<>
keep their nostrils clean and free from impurities.
A favorite Oriental method is to snuff little water

26

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

up the nostrils allowing it to run down the passage into the
from thence it may be ejected through the mouth.
Some Hindu yogis immerse the face in a bowl of water,
and by a sort of suction draw in quite a quantity of water,
but this latter method requires considerable practice, and
the first mentioned method is equally efficacious, and much
more easily performed.
Another good plan is to open the window and breathe
freely, closing one nostril with the finger or thumb, sniffing up the air through the open nostril. Then repeat the
process on the other nostril. Repeat several times, changing nostrils. This method will usually clear the nostrils
throat,

of obstructions.
v
In case the trouble is caused by catarrh it is well to
apply a little vaseline or camphor ice or similar preparation.

Or sniff up a little witch-hazel extract once in a while,
and you will notice a marked improvement. A little care
and attention will result in the nostrils becoming clean
and remaining so.
We have given considerable space to this subject of
nostril-breathing, not only because of its great importance
in its reference to health, but because nostril-breathing is

a prerequisite to the practice of the breathing exercises to
be given later in this book, and because nostril-breathing
is one of the basic principles underlying the Yogi Science
of Breath.
We urge upon the student the necessity of acquiring
this method of breathing if he has it not, and caution him
igainst dismissing this phase of the subject as unimportant

CHAPTER VI

i.

IHtt FOUR METHODS OF RESPIRATION.
In the consideration of the question of respiration, we

must begin by considering the mechanical arrangements
whereby the respiratory movements are effected. The
mechanics of respiration manifest through

(1)

the elastic

movements of the lungs, and (2) the activities of the sides
and bottom of the thoracic cavity in which the lungs are
contained. The thorax is that portion of the trunk between
the neck and the abdomen, the cavity of which (known as
the thoracic cavity) is occupied mainly by the lungs and
heart.
It is bounded by the spinal column, the ribs with
their cartilages, the breastbone, and below by the diaphragm. It is generally spoken of as "the chest." It has
been compared to a completely shut, conical box, the small
end of which is turned upward, the back of the box being
formed by the spinal column, the front by the breastbone

and the sides by the ribs.

The ribs are twenty-four in number, twelve on each
The
upper seven pair are known as "true ribs," being fastened
side, and emerge from each side of the spinal column.

to the breastbone direct, while the lower five pairs are
called (false ribs) or "floating ribs," because they are not
so fastened, the upper two of them being fastened by carti-

lage to the other ribs, the remainder
lages, their forward ends being free.

having

no

carti-

The ribs are moved in respiration by two superficial
muscular layers, known as the intercostal muscles. The
diaphragm, the muscular partition before alluded to, separates the chest box from the abdominal cavity.
In the act of inhalation the muscles expand the lungs
so that a vacuum is created and the air rushes in in accordance with the well known law of physics. Everything
depends upon the muscles concerned In the process of respiration, which we may as, for convenience, term the
"respiratory muscles." Without the aid of these muscles
the lungs cannot expand, and upon the proper use and
27

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

VI

control of these muscles the Science of Breath largely deThe proper control of these muscles will result
pends.
in the ability to attain the maximum degree of lung expansion, and the greatest amount of the life giving properties

of the air into the system.

The Yogis classify Respiration into four general methods, viz:

(2)

High Breathing.
Mid Breathing.

(3)

Low Breathing.

(4)

Yogi Complete Breathing.

(1)

We will give a general idea of the first three methods,
and a more extended treatment of the fourth method, upon
which the Yogi Science of Breath is largely based.
(1)

HIGH BREATHING.

This form of breathing is known to the Western world
as Clavicular Breathing, or Collarbone Breathing.
One
breathing in this way elevates the ribs and raises the collarbone and shoulders, at the same time drawing in the

abdomen and pushing its contents up against the diaphragm, which in turn is raised.
The upper part of the chest and lungs, which is the
smallest, is used, and consequently but a minimum amount
of air enters the lungs. In addition to this, the diaphragm
being raised, there can be no expansion in that direction.
A study of the anatomy of the chest will convince any
student that in this way a maximum amount of effort is
used to obtain a minimum amount of benefit.
High Breathing is probably the worst form of breathing known to man and requires the greatest expenditure
of energy with the smallest amount of benefit. It Is an
It is quite common
energy-wasting, poor-returns plan.
among the Western races, many women being addicted to
It, and even singers, clergymen, lawyers and others, who
should know better, using it ignorantly.
Many diseases of the vocal organs and organs of res-

piration may be directly traced to this barbarous method of
breathing, and the straining of delicate organs caused by
this method, often results in the harsh, disagreeable voices

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

2

heard on all sides. Many persons who breathe in this
way become addicted to the disgusting practice of "mouthbreathing" described in a preceding chapter.
If the student has any doubts about what has been
said regarding this form of breathing, let him try the
experiment of expelling all the air from his lungs, then
standing erect, with hands at sides, let him raise the shoulHe will find that the
ders and collar-bone and inhale.
amount of air inhaled far below normal. Then let him
inhale a full breath, after dropping the shoulders and
collar-bone, and he will receive an object lesson in breathing which he will be apt to remember much longer than
he would any words, printed or spoken.
(2)

MID BREATHING-.

This method of respiration is known to Western students as Rib Breathing, or Inter-Costal Breathing, and while
less objectionable than High Breathing, is far inferior to
either Low Breathing or to the Yogi Complete Breath.
In Mid Breathing the diaphragm is pushed upward, and
The ribs are raised somewhat,
the abdomen drawn in.
and the chest is partially expanded. It is quite common
among men who have made no study of the subject. As
there are two better methods known, we give it only passing notice, and that principally to call your attention to
its short-comings.
(3)

LOW BREATHING.

This form of respiration is far better than either of
the two preceding forms, and of recent years many Western writers have extolled its merits, and have exploited
it under the names of "Abdominal Breathing,"
"Deep
Breathing," "Diaphragmic Breathing," etc., etc., and much
good has been accomplished by the attention of the public
naving been directed to the subject, and many having been
induced to substitute it for the inferior and injurious
methods above alluded to. Many "systems" of breathing
have been built around Low Breathing, and students have
paid high prices to learn the new (?) systems. But, as vv
have said, much good has resulted, and after all the^students

who paid high prices to learn revamped old systems

30

SCIENCE OF B REATa.

undoubtedly got their money'* worth if they were induced
methods of High Breathing and Low

to discard the old

Breathing.

Although many Western authorities write and speak
known form of breathing, the
Yogis know it to be but a part of a system which they have
used for centuries and which they know as "The ComIt must be admitted, however, that one
plete Breath."
must be acquainted with the principles of Low Breathing
before he can grasp the idea of Complete Breathing.
~
Let us again consider the diaphragm. What is it? We
have seen that it is the great partition muscle, which separates the chest and its contents from the abdomen and
its contents.
When at rest it presents a concave surface
to the abdomen. That is, the diaphragm as viewed from
the abdomen would seem like the sky as viewed from the
earth the interior of an arched surface.
Consequently
the side of the diaphragm toward the chest organs is like
a protruding rounded surface like a hill. When the diaphragm is brought into use the hill formation is lowered
and the diaphragm presses upon the abdominal organs and
forces out the abdomen.
of this method as the best

In Low Breathing, the lungs are given freer plaj
than in the methods already mentioned, and consequently
more air is inhaled. This fact has led the majority of

Western writers to speak and write of Low Breathing
(which they call Abdominal Breathing) as the highest and
best method known to science. But the Oriental Yogi has
long known of a better method, and some few Western
writers have also recognized this fact. The trouble with
all methods of
breathing, other than "Yogi Complete
Breathing" is that in none of these methods do the lungs
become filled with air at the best only a portion of the
is filled, even in Low Breathing.
High Breath<^ luug spaces
M. ing fills oiiy the upper portion of the lungs. Mid Breath'<
Irjc fills only the middle and a portion of the upper parts.
j
?**w Breathing fills only the lower and middle parts. It
is evident that any method that fills the entire iung spacf

must be far preferable to those filling only certain parts

*ny method which will fill the entire lung space must h

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

*

the greatest value to Man in the way of allowing him to
absorb the greatest quantity of oxygen and to store away
The Complete Breath Is
the greatest amount of prana.
known to the Yogis to be the best method of respiration

known to science.

THE YOGI COMPLETE BREATH.
Yogi Complete Breathing includes all the good points
of High Breathing, Mid Breathing and Low Breathing,
It
with the objectionable features of each eliminated.
brings into play the entire respiratory apparatus, every
part of the lungs, every air-cell, every respiratory muscle.
The entire respiratory organism responds to this method
of breathing, and the maximum amount of benefit is derived from the minimum expenditure of energy. The chest
cavity is increased to its normal limits in all directions
and every part of the machinery performs its natural work
and functions.
^
One of the most important features of this method of
.

breathing is the fact that the respiratory muscles are fully
called into play, whereas in the other forms of breathing
only a portion of these muscles are so used. In Complete
Breathing, among other muscles, those controlling the ribs
are actively used, which increases the space in which the
lungs may expand, and also gives the proper support to
the organs when needed, Nature availing herself of the
perfection of the principle of leverage in this process. Certain muscles hold the lower ribs firmly in position, while
other muscles bend them outward.
Then again, in this method, the diaphragm is under
perfect control and is able to perform its functions properly, and in such manner as to yield the maximum degree
of service.
In the rib-action, above alluded to, the lower ribs are
controlled by the diaphragm which draws them slightly

downward, while other muscles hold them in place and the
intercostal muscles force them outward, which combined
action increases the mid-chest cavity to its maximum.

In

addition to this muscular action, the tipper ribs are also
lifted and forced outward by the Intercostal muscles,

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

32

which increases the capacity of the upper chest to its fullest extent
If

you have studied the special features of the four

given methods of breathing, you will at once see that the
Complete Breath comprises all the advantageous features
of the three other methods, plus the reciprocal advantages
accruing from the combined action of the high-chest, midchest, and diaphragm ic regions, and the normal rythm
thus obtained.
In our next chapter, we will take up the Complete
Breath In practice, and will give full directions for the
acquirement of this superior method of breathing, vrith
exercise*, etc

CHAPTER VIII.
HOW TO ACQUIBE THE YOGI COMPLETE BBEATH.
The Yogi Complete Breath is the fundamental breath
of the entire Yogi Science of Breath, and the stvdent must
fully acquaint himself with it, and master it perfectly
before he can hope to obtain results from the other forma
He should
of breath mentioned and given in this book.
not be content with half-learning it, but should go to wor
in earnest until it becomes his natural method of breathThis will require work, time and patience, but withing.

out these things nothing is ever accomplished. Ther fs
no royal road to the Science of Breath, and the student
must be prepared to practice and study in earnest if he
expect to receive results. The results obtained by a complete mastery of the Science of Breath are great, and no
one who has attained them would willingly go back to
the old methods, and he will tell his friends that he considers himself amply repaid for all his work. We say these
things now, that you may fully understand the necessity
and importance of mastering this fundamental method
of Yogi Breathing, instead of passing it by and trying
some of the attractive looking variations given later on i
this book.
Again, we say to you: Start right, and rigui
results will follow; but neglect your foundations and your
entire building will topple over sooner or later.
Perhaps the better way to teach you how to develop
the Yogi Complete Breath, would be to give you simple
directions regarding the breath itself, and then follow up
the same with general remarks concerning it, and then
later on giving exercises for developing the chest, muscles
and lungs which have been allowed to remain in an undeveloped condition by imperfect methods of breathing.
Right here we wish to say that this Complete Breath is
not a forced or abnormal thing, but on the contrary is a
going back to first principles a return to Nature. The
healthy adult savage and the healthy infant of civilization
bctb breathe in this manner, but civilized man has adopted

83

SCIENCE OF BEEAIH.

34

unnatural methods of living, clothing, etc., and has lost
uis birthright.
And we wish to remind the reader that
the Complete Breath does not necessarily call for the com-

One may
amount of air, using the Complete
Breathing Method and distributing the air inhaled, be the
quantity large or small, to all parts of the lungs. But one

plete filling of the langs at every inhalation.

inhale the average

should inhale a series of full Complete Breaths several
limes a day, whenever opportunity offers, in order to keep
Jhe system in good order and condition.

The following simple exercise will give you a
dea of what the Complete Breath is:
(1)
trils,

Stand or

sit

inhale steadily,

erect.
first

clear

Breathing through the nosthe lower part of the

filling

lungs, which is accomplished by bringing into play the
diaphragm, which descending exerts a gentle pressure on
the abdominal organs, pushing forward the front walls of
Then fill the middle part of the lungs, pushtile abdomen.
Ing out the lower ribs, breast-bone and chest. Then fill

the higher portion of the lungs, protruding the upper chest,

thus lifting the chest, including the upper six or seven
In the final movement, the lower part of
pah's of ribs.
the abdomen will be slightly drawn in, which movement
gives the lungs a support and also helps to fill the highest
part of the lungs.
At first reading it may appear that this breath consists
of three distinct movements.
This, however, is not the
correct idea. The inhalation is continuous, the entire chest
cavity from the lowered diaphragm to the highest point
of the chest in the region of the collar-bone, being expanded
with a uniform movement. Avoid a jerky series of inhalations, and strive to attain a steady continuous action. Practice will

soon overcome the tendency to divide the inhala-

tion into three movements, and will result in a uniform con-

tinuous breath.

You will be able to complete the inhala-

3on in a couple of seconds after a little practice.
Retain the breath a few seconds. -r-5pMHf y
<*rfT (2)
Exhale quite slowly, holding the chest in a firm
(3)
position,

and Pairing the abdomen in a

npward slowlj

little

as 'the air leaves the lungs.

and

Wher

lifting it
>he air it

SCIENCE OF BREATH,

A

little
entirely exhaled, relax the chest and abdomen.
practice will render tHis part of the exercise easy, and th?

movement once acquired will be afterwards performed
almost automatically.
It will be seen that by this method of breathing aH
parts of the respiratory apparatus is brought into action,
and all parts of the lungs, including the most remote air
cells,

are exercised.

Th&_qhest_^ cavity, .is..exgadgd_in_jall

You will also notice that the Complete Breath
a combination of Low, Mid and High Breaths-

directions.
is

really

succeeding each other rapidly in the order given, in such
a manner as to form one uniform, continuous, complete
breath.

,oIljKnt vuuiuui

f )f1H

You will find it quite a help to you if you will practice
hands lightly

this breath before a large mirror, placing the

over the abdomen so that you may feel the movements.
At the end of the inhalation, it is well to occasionally
slightly elevate the shoulders, thus raising the collarbone
and allowing the air to pass freely into the small upper
lobe of the right lung, which place is sometimes the breed-

3u>y

ing place of tuberculosis.
S1 f}
f
At the beginning of practice, you may have more or
less trouble in acquiring the Complete Breath, but a little
,

make perfect, and when you have once
you will never williiigly return to the o)d

practice will

acquired

it
..,].,

7/

?urjmi Rfdi aeofa

Y[qini8

,!.:
:

""J<i_Jo

fciMaiJ

TKioitjuil, oJ

ot

'/oritui

TS<=l

ii

>>[

1i

eiH fm

)><.

^ v^
Cs

iv

**

CHAPTER IX.
PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECT OF THE COMPLETE

BREATH.
Scarcely too much can be said of the advantages
attending the practice of the Complete Breath. And yet
the student who has carefully read the foregoing pages
should scarcely need to have pointed out to him such advantages.

The practice of the Complete Breath will make any

man or woman immune to Consumption and other pulmonary troubles, and will do away with all liability to
contract "colds," as well as bronchial and similar weaknesses. Consumption is due principally to lowered vitality
attributable to an insufficient amount of air being inhaled.

The impairment of vitality renders the system open to
attacks from disease germs.
Imperfect breathing allows
a considerable part of the lungs to remain inactive, and
such portions offer an inviting field for bacilli, which invading the weakened tissue soon produce havoc. Good
Wealthy lung tissue will resist the germs, and the only way
to have good healthy lung tissue is to use the lungs properly.

What
Consumptives are nearly all .p ajrow-phfxaf<^\
Simply that these people were addicted
to .improper habits of breathing, and consequently their
chests failed to develop and expand. The man who practices the Complete Breath will have a full broad chest,
nd the narrow-chested man may develop his chest to normal proportions if he will but adopt this mode of breathing. Such people must develop their chest cavities if they
value their lives. Colds may often be prevented by practicing a little vigorous Complete Breathing whenever you
When chilled,
feel that you are being unduly exposed.
breathe vigorously a few minutes, and you will feel
a glow all over your body. Most colds can be cured by
Complete Breathing and partial fasting for a day.
The quality of the blood depends largely upon itf
,

does this mean?

36

"7
fyt

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

37

proper oxygenation in the lungs, and if it IB under-oxygenated it becomes poor in quality and laden with all aorta
of impurities, and the system suffers from lack of nourishment, and often becomes actually poisoned by the waste
products remaining uneliminated in the blood. As the entire
body, every organ and every part, is dependent upon the
blood for nourishment, impure blood must have a serious
effect upon the entire system. The remedy is plain practice the Yogi Complete Breath.
The stomach and other organs of nutrition suffer much
from improper breathing. Not only are they ill nourished
by reason of the lack of oxygen, but as the food must
absorb oxygen from the blood* and become oxygenated
before it can be digested and assimilated, it is readily seen

how digestion and assimilation is impaired by incorrect
breathing. And when assimilation is not normal, the system receives less and less nourishment, the appetite fails,
bodily vigor decreases, and energy diminishes, and the man
withers and declines. All from the lack of proper breathing.

Even

nervous system suffers from improper
inasmuch as toe brain, the spinal cord, the
nerve centers, and the nerves themselves, when improperly
nourished by means of the blood, become poor and inefficient instruments for generating, storing and transmitting
the

breathing,

the nerve currents.

And improperly nourished they will

become if sufficient oxygen is not absorbed through the
There is another aspect of the case whereby the
lungs.
nerve currents themselves, or rather the force from which
the nerve currents spring, becomes lessened from want
of proper breathing, but this belongs to another phase of
the subject which is treated of in other chapters of this

book, and our purpose here is to direct your attention to
the fact that the mechanism of the nervous system is
rendered inefficient as an instrument for conveying nerve
force, as the indirect result of a lack of proper breathing.

The effect of the reproductive organs upon the general
is too well known to be discussed at
length^here,

health

but we may be permitted to say that with the reproductive
organs in a weakened condition the entire system feels the

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

83

The Complete
reflex action and suffers sympathetically.
Breath produces a rhythm which is Nature's own plan for
keeping this important part of the system in normal condition, and, from the first, it will be noticed that the reproductive functions are strengthened and vitalized, thus, by
sympathetic reflex action, giving tone to the whole system. By this, we do not mean that the lower sex impulses The Yogis are advocates
will be aroused; far from it.
of continence and chastity, and have learned to control
But sexual control does not mean
the animal passions.
sexual weakness, and the Yogi teachings are that the man

or

woman whose

reproductive organism

is

normal and

healthy, will have a stronger will with which to control
himself or herself. The Yogi believes tnat much of the

perversion of this wonderful part of the system comes
from a lack of normal health, and results from a morbid
rather than a normal condition of these organs. A little
careful consideration of this question will prove that the
Yogi teachings are right. This is not the place to discuss
the subject fully, but the Yogis know that sex-energy may
be conserved and used *or the development of the body
ind mind of the individual, instead of being dissipated
in unnatural excesses as is the wont of so many ur.r-

formed people. By special request we will give in .h?s
book one of the favorite Yogi exercises for this purpose.
But whether or not the student wishes to adopt the Yogi
theories of continence and clean-living, he or she will find
that the Complete Breath will do more to restore health
to this part of the system than anything else ever tried.
Remember, now, we mean normal health, not undue development. The sensualist will find that normal means a
lessening of desire rather than an increase; the weakened
man or woman will find a toning up and a relief from the
weakness which has heretofore depressed him or her.
We do not wish to be misunderstood or misquoted on this

The Yogis' ideal is a body stro'.ig in all its parts,
under the control of a masterful and developed Will, ani-

subject.

mated by high ideals.

,

Jn the practice of the Complete Breath, during inhalation, the diaphragm contracts and exerts a gentle pressure

SCIENCE

Oi

BREATH.

n

upon the liver, stomach and other organs, which in con
nection with the rhythm of the lungs acts as a gentle massage of these organs and stimulates their actions, and

Each inhalation aids in
and assists in causing a normal cirthe organs of nutrition and elimination. IB

encourages normal functioning.
this internal exercise,

culation to

High or Mid Breathing the organs lose the benefit accru
ing from this internal massage.
The Western world is paying much attention to PhysBut in their
ical Culture just now, which is a good thing.
enthusiasm they must not forget that the exercise of the
external muscles is not everything. The internal organs
also need exercise, and Nature's plan for this exercise is
The diaphragm is Nature's principal
proper breathing.
instrument for this internal exercise. Its motion vibrates
the important organs of nutrition and elimination, an<?,
massages and kneads them at each inhalation and exhalation, forcing blood into them, and then squeezing it out,
and imparting a general tone to the organs. Any organ
or part of the body which is not exercised gradually atrophies and refuses to function properly, and lack of the internal exercise afforded by the diaphragmatic action leads
to diseased organs. The Complete Breath gives the proper
motion to the diaphragm, as well as exercising the middle
and upper chest. It is indeed "complete" in its action.
From the standpoint of Western physiology alone,
without reference to the Oriental philosophies and science,
this Yogi system of Complete Breathing is of vital importance to every man, woman and child who wishes to acquire health and keep it. Its very simplicity keeps thousands from seriously considering it, while they spend fortunes in seeking health through complicated and expensive
"systems." Health knocks at their door and they answer
not. Verily the stone which the builders reject is the real
cornerstone of the Temple or He ilth.

CHAPTER X.
A FEW BITS OF YOGI LOBE.
We

give

below

among the Yogis.

three

The

forms

first

is

of breath, quite popular
the well-known Yogi Cleans-

ing Breath, to which is attributed much of the great lung
endurance found among the Yogis.
They usually finish up
breathing exercise with this Cleansing Breath, and we
have followed this plan in this book. We also give the
Yogi Nerve Vitalizing Exercise, which has been handed
down among them for ages, and which has never been improved on by Western teachers of Physical Culture, although some of them have "borrowed" it from teachers of
Yoga. We also give the Yogi Vocal Breath, which ac-

a

counts largely for the melodious, vibrant voices of the
better class of the Oriental Yogis. We feel that if this
book contained nothing more than these three exercises, it
would be invaluable to the Western student. Take these
exercises as a gift from your Eastern brothers and put

them into practice.

THE YOGI CLEANSING BREATH.
The Yogis have a favorite form of breathing which
they practice when they feel the necessity of ventilating
and cleansing the lungs. They conclude many of their
other breathing exercises with this breath, and we have
followed this practice in this book. This Cleansing Breath
ventilates and cleanses the lungs, stimulates the cells and
gives a general tone to the respiratory organs, and is con-

ducive to their general healthy condition. Besides this
effect, it is found to greatly refresh the entire system.
Speakers, singers, etc., will find this breath especially
restful, after having tired the respiratory organs.
.^
Inhale a complete breath.
(1)
Retain the air a few seconds.
(?)
Pucker
ucer up thee lips
or a wste
whistle (but
ut do
o not
(3)
ps as if for
well out the cheeks), then exhale a little air through tlf
peuing, with considerable vigor. Then stop for a moment,
40

1
.A.

c

SCIENCE OF BREATH,

4t

retaining the air, and then exhale a little more air.

Repeat

until the air is completely exhaled.
Remember tnat considerable vigor is to be used in exhaling the air through

the opening in the lips.
This breath will be found quite refreshing when one
is tired and generally "used up."
A trial will convince the
student of its merits. This exercise should be practiced
until it can be performed naturally and easily, as it is used
to finish up a number of other exercises given in this book,
and it should be thoroughly understood.

THE YOGI NERVE VITALIZING BREATH.
This is an exercise well known to the Yogis, who conit one of the strongest nerve stimulants and in-

sider

known to man. Its purpose is to stimulate the
Nervous System, develop nerve force, energy and vitality.
This exercise brings a stimulating pressure to bear on important nerve centers, which in turn stimulate and energize
the entire nervous system, and send an increased flow of
vigorants

nerve force to all parts of the body.
Stand erect.
(1)
Inhale a Complete Breath, and retain same.
(2)

Extend the arms straight in front of you, letting
(3)
them be somewhat limp and relaxed, with only sufficient
nerve force to hold them out.
Slowly draw the hands back toward the shoulders,
(4)
gradually contracting the muscles and putting force into
them, so that when they reach the shoulders the fists will
be so tightly clenched that a tremulous motion is felt.
Then, keeping the muscles tense, push the fists
(5)
slowly out, and then draw them back rapidly (still tense)
several times.
(6)

Exhale vigorously through the mouth.

(7)

Practice the Cleansing Breath.

The efficiency of this

exercise depends greatly upon
the speed of the drawing back of the fists, and the tension
el the muscles, and, of course, upon the full lungs. This
exercise

must be tried

to

be appreciated.

It is

equal as a "bracer," as our Western friends put it.

without

SCIENCE OF S SEATS.

42

YOGI VOCAL BREATH.
The Yogis have a form of breathing to develop the
They are noted for their wonderful voices, which
are strong, smooth and clear, and have a wonderful
trumpet-like carrying power. They have practiced this
roice.

particular form of breathing exercise which has resulted
in rendering their voices soft, beautiful and flexible, im-

parting to

it

that indescribable, peculiar floating quality,

combined with great power. The exercise given below will
in time impart the above-mentioned qualities, or the Yogi
Voice, to the student who practices it faithfully. It is to
be understood, of course, that this form of breath is to be
used only as an occasional exercise, and not as a regular
form of breathing.
Inhale a Complete Breath very slowly, but steadily,
(1)
through the nostrils, taking as much time as possible in
the inhalation.
Retain for a few seconds.
(2)
(8)
Expel the air vigorously in one great breath,
through the wide opened mouth.
Rest the lungs by the Cleansing Breath.
(4)
.

Without going deeply into the Yogi theories of soundproduction in speaking and singing, we wish to say that
experience has taught them that the timbre, quality and
power of a voice depends not alone upon the vocal organs
in the throat, but that the facial muscles, etc., have much
Some men with large chests produce
to do with the matter.
but a poor tone, while others with comparatively smart
chests produce tones of amazing strength and quality.

Here is an interesting experiment worth trying: Stand
oefore a glass and pucker up your mouth and whistle, and
note the shape of your mouth and the general expression
of your face. Then sing or speak as you do naturally, and
see the difference. Then start to whistle again for a few
seconds, and then, without changing the position of your lip
'face,
sing a few notes and notice what a
resonant clear and beautiful tone is produced.

or

vibrant.

.nii

-iu^jv-

ftlndza

.lIJ-3fJ yilivt;

CHAPTEB

XI.

THE SEVEN YOGI DEVELOPING EXERCISES.
The following are the seven favorite exercises of the
Yogis for developing the lungs, muscles, ligaments, air
They are quite simple but marvelously effective.
cells, etc.
Do not let the simplicity of these exercises make you lose
interest, for they are the result of careful experiments and
practice on the part of the Yogis, and are the essence of
numerous intricate and complicated exercises, the nonessential portions being eliminated and the essential features retained.
(1)

THE RETAINED BREATH.

This is a very important exercise which tends to
strengthen and develop the respiratory muscles as well as
the lungs, and its frequent practice will also tend to expand
the chest. The Yogis have found that an occasional holding of the breath, after the lungs have been filled with the
Complete Breath, is very beneficial, not only to the respiratory orgaua but to the organs of nutrition, the nervous
They have found that an
system and the blood itself.
occasional holding of the breath lends to purify the air
which has remained in the lungs from former inhalations.
and to more fully oxygenate the blood. They also know
that the breath so retained gathers up all the waste matter.
and when the breath is expelled it carries with it the effete
matter of the system, and cleanses the lungs just as a
purgative does the bowels. The Yogis recommend this
exercise for various disorders of the stomach, liver and
blood, and also find that it frequently relieves bad breath,
which often arises from poorly ventilated lungs. We
recommend students to pay considerable attention to thit
exercise, as it has great merits. The following direction;:
~ ^k:;!*^
will give you a clear idea of the exrcie:
^> t
Stand erect '*> YIIUU U'>iJJ// PT -*4*1
(1)
T.nnale a
Complete Breath,
(2)
'etain the air as long as you can comfortably
(3)
.

43

t

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

t4

(4)

Exhale vigorously through the open moutn.

(5)

Practice the Cleansing Breath.

At first you will be able to retain the breath only a
short time, but a little practice will also show a great improvement. Time yourself with a watch if you wish to
note your progress.

LUNG CELL STIMULATION.

(2)

This exercise is designed to stimulate the air cells in
the Jungs, but beginners must not overdo it, and in no case
should it be indulged in too vigorously. Some may find a
slight dizziness resulting from the first few trials, in which
case let them walk around a little and discontinue the

exercise for a while.
(1)
(2)
(3)

Stand erect, with hands at sides.
Breathe in very slowly and gradually.
While inhaling, gently tap the chest with th*

finger tips, constantly
(4)

changing position.

When the lungs are filled, retain the breath

pat the chest with the palms of the hands.
Practice the Cleansing Bream.
(5)

very bracing and stimulating to the
a well-known Yogi practice. Many of
the air cells of the lungs become inactive by reason of incomplete breathing, and often become almost atrophied.
One who has practiced imperfect breathing for years wil!

This exercise

<hoie body, and

is

is

find it not so easy to stimulate all these ill-used air cells into activity all at

once by the Complete breath, but this

exercise will do

much toward bringing auout the desired

result,

and is worth study and practice.

RIB STRETCHING.

(3)

We have explained that the ribs ar

fastened by
lr
which admit of considerable expansion.
proper breathing, the ribs play an important part, and it *r>
well to occasionally give them a little special exercise in
cartilages,

order t preserve their elasticity. Standing or sitting in
unnatural positions, to which many of the Western people
are

addicted,

is

and

inelastic,

and

same.

apt

to

this

render the
exercise

will

ribs

do

more
much

or

less

to

overcome

stivL

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

45

Stand erect
Place the hands one on each side of the body, as
high up under the armpits as convenient, the thumbs
reaching toward the back, the palms on the side of the
chest and the fingers to the front over the breast
Inhale a Complete Breath.
(3)
Retain the air for a short time.
(4)
Then gently squeeze the sides, at the same time
(5)
(1)
(2)

Rlowly exhaling.
Practice the cleansing breath.
(6)
Use moderation in this exercise and do not overdo It
(4)

CHEST EXPANSION.

The chest is quite apt to be contracted from bending
etc.
This exercise is very good for the
purpose of restoring natural conditions and gaining chest
expansion.
Stand erect.
(1)
Inhale a Complete Breath.
(2)
Retain the air.
(3)
Extend both arms forward and bring the two
(4)
clenched fists together on a level with the shoulder.
Then swing back the fists vigorously until the
(5)
arms stand out straight sideways from the shoulders.

over one's work,

(7)

Then bring back to Position 4, and swing to PosiRepeat several times.
Exhale vigorously through the opened mouth.

(8)

Practice the Cleansing Breath.

(6)

tion 5.

Use moderation and do not overdo this exercise.
(5)

(1)

WALKING EXERCISE.

Walk with head up, chin drawn slightly in, shoul-

ders back, and with measured tread.
(2)

Inhale

a

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,

Complete Breath, counting (mentally)
one count to each step, making the in

halation extend over the eight counts.
Exhale slowly through the nostrils, counting as
(3)
before 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 one count to a step.

Rest between breaths, continuing walking
(4)
counting, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, one count to a stei>;

and

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

46
(5)

Repeat until you begin to

for a while, and resume at pleasure.

fee! tired.

Then

rest

Repeat several times

a day.

Some Yogis vary this exercise by retaining the breath
during a 1, 2, 3, 4, count, and then exhale in an eight-step
count. Practice whichever plan seems most agreeable to
you.
'

(6)

9ffr

MORNING EXERCISE.

Stand erect in a military attitude, head up, eyes
front, shoulders back, knees stiff, hands at sides.
Raise body slowly on toes, inhaling a Complete
(2)
(1)

Breath, steadily and slowly.
Retain the breath for a few seconds, maintaining
(3)
the same position.
(4)

Slowly sink to

first

position,

at the

same time

slowly exhaling the air through the nostrils.
Practice Cleansing Breath.
(5)
(6)
Repeat several times, varying by using right leg
alone, then left leg alone.
OTrt

STIMULATING CIRCULATION.

(7)
f
<n1t
Stand erect.
(1)

snbd

(2)

(3)

:

(H
,,,,,,..,

Inhale a Complete Breath and retain.
Bend forward slightly and grasp a stick or cane

and firmly, and gradually exerting your entire
strength upon the grasp.
Relax the grasp, return to fir * TOM
and
(4J|
position,
~
*- \-\
T ,^lt{f 1MJ
^TJI
\rtiJ\r \J,* f
77
slowly exhale.
^ anteoisO'sitt *>*wnI
(5)
Repeat several times,, fl of> ftna nottBTOboffl 98 -j
Finish with the Cleansing Breath.
(6)
This exercise may be performed without the use of a
stick or cane, by grasping an imaginary cane, using the
will to exert the pressure.
The exercise is a favorite Yogi
steadily

f

)

1

I

r

plan of stimulating the circulation by driving the arterial
blood to the extremities, and drawing back the venous
blood to the heart and lungs that it may take up' the

oxygen w?:h has been inhaled with the air. la cases of
poor circu' lion there is not enough blood in the lungs to
absorb tb
increased amount of oxygen inhaled, and the
not get the full benefit of the improved breathtystem do<

SCIENCE OF BREATH.
nig.

In such cases, particularly, it Is well to practice thl*

exercise, occasionally

with the regular Complete Breath

'g exercise

V
*^

^
-v

CHAP TEE X 1 1.
SEVEN MINOR YOGI EXERCISES.
This chapter is composed of seven minor Yogi Breath'
ing Exercises, bearing no special names, but each distinct
and separate from the others and having a different purpose in view. Each student will find several of these exercises best adapted to the special requirements of his par
ticular case. Although we have styled these exercises

"minor exercises," they are quite valuable and useful, or
they would not appear in this book. They give one a condensed course in "Physical Culture" and "Lung Development," and might readily be "padded out" and elaborated
into a small book on these subjects. They have, of course,

an additional value, as Yogi Breathing forms a part of each
exercise. Do not pass them by becaue they are marked
"minor." Some one or more of these exercises may be just
what you need. Try them and decide for yourself.

EXERCISE I.
(1)

Stand erect with hands at sides.

Inhale Complete Breath.
Raise the arms slowly, keeping them rigid unth
the hands touch over head.
Retain the breath a few minutes with hands over
(4)
(2)

(3)

head.

Lower hands slowly to sides, exhaling slowly at
(5)
same time.
(6)

Practice Cleansing Breath.

EXERCISE 11.
(1)
(2)
(3)

to first

Stand erect, with arms straight In front of you.
Inhale Complete Breath and retain.
Swing arms back as far as they will go; then back
position; then repeat several times, retaining the

breath all the while.
(4)
(5)

Exhale vigorously through
Practice Cleansing Breath.
48

moi;;f;h.

SCIENCE OF BBEATH.

49

EXERCISE III.
(1)
(2)
(3)

times.

Stand erect with arms straight in front of you.
Inhale Complete Breath.
Swing arms around in a circle, backward, a few
Then reverse a few times, retaining the breath all

the while.

You may vary

this

by rotating them

alter-

nately like the sails of a windmill.
Exhale the breath vigorously through the mouth.
(4)
Practice Cleansing Breath.
(5)

EXERCISE IV.
Lie on the floor with your face downward and
(1)
palms of hands flat upon the floor by your sides.
Inhale Complete Breath and retain.
(2)
Stiffen the body and raise yourself up by the
(3)
strength of your arms until you rest on your hands and
toes
(4)

Then lower yourself to original position.

Repeat

several times.
(5)

Exhale vigorously through your mouth.

(6)

Practice Cleansing Breath.

EXERCISE V.
(2)

Stand erect with your palms against the wall.
Inhale Complete Breath and retain.

(3)

Lower the chest to the wall, resting your weight

(1)

on your hands.
(4)

Then raise yourself back with the arm muscles

alone, keeping the
(5)

body stiff.
Exhale vigorously through the mouth.

(6)

Practice Cleansing Breath.

EXERCISE VI.
Stand erect with arms "akimbo," that is, with
hands resting around the waist and elbows standing out.
Inhale Complete Breath and retain.
(2)
(3)
Keep legs and hips stiff and bend well forward, as
if bowing, at the same time exhaling slowly.
Return to first position and take another Com(4)
(1)

plete Breath.

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

50
(5)

Then bend backward, exhaling slowly.

(6)

Return to

first

position

and

a

Complete

slowly.

(Vary by

take

Breath.

Then bend sideways, exhalin"

1

(7)

bending to right

and then to left.)

(8)

Practice Cleansing Breath.

(1)

Stand

EXERCISE VII.
erect,

or

sit

erect,

with straight spinal

column.
(2)
in

a

Inhale a Complete Breath, but instead of inhaling
steady stream, take a series of abort,

continuous

quick "sniffs," as if you were smelling aromatic salts or
ammonia and did not wish to get too strong a "whiff."

Do not exhale any of these little breaths, but add one to
the other until the entire lung space is filled.
(8)

(4)

Retain for a few seconds.
Exhale through the nostrils

sighing breath.
Practice Cleansing Breath.
(5)

in

a

long,

restful,

CHAPTER XIII.
VIBRATION AND YOGI RHYTHMIC BREATHIQf
All Is in vibration. From the tiniest atom to the
greatest sun, everything is in a state of vibration. 1'here
is nothing in absolute rest itt nature.
single atom deprived of vibration would wreck the universe. In inces-

A

work is performed. Matter
being constantly played upon by energy and countless
forms and numberless varieties result, and yet even the
forms and varieties are not permanent. They begin to
change the moment they are created, and from them are
born innumerable forms, which in turn change and give
sant vibration the universal
is

newer forms, and so on and on, in infinite sucNothing is permanent in the world of forms, and
yet the great Reality is unchangeable. Forms are but aprise to

cession.

pearances

they come, they go, but the Reality

is

eternal

and unchangeable.
The atoms of the human body are in constant vibration.
Unceasing changes are occurring. In a few months
there is almost a complete change in the matter composing
toe body, and scarcely a single atom now composing your
body will be found in it a few months hence. Vibration,
constant vibration. Change, constant change.
In all vibration is to be fownd a certain rhythm.
Ahythm pervades the universe. 3?fce swing of the planets
around the sun; the rise and fall of the sea; the beating oi
the heart; the ebb and flow of the tide; all follow rhythmiclaws. The rays of the sun reach us; the rain descends
upon us, in obedience to the same law. All growth is but
an exhibition of this law. All motion is a manifestation
of the law of rhythm.
Our bodies are as much subject to rhythmic laws as
is the planet in its revolution around the sun.
Much of
the esoteric Bide of the Yogi Science of Breath is based
upon this known principle of naNrf. By falling in with
the rhythm of the body, the Yogi manages to absorb a
great amount of Prana, which he disposes of to bring abou*
51

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

5
results

desired

by him.

We will speak of this at great-

length later on.

The body which you occupy Is like a smaft iniet running In to the land from the sea. Although apparently
subject only to its

own laws, it is really subject to the

ebb and flow of the tides of the ocean. The great sea of
life Is swelling and receding, rising and falling, and we
are responding to its vibrations and rhythm. In a normal
condition we receive the vibration and rhythm of the great
ocean of life, and respond to it, but at times the mouth of
the inlet seems choked up with debris, and we fail to
receive the impulse from Mother Ocean, and inharmony
manifests within us.
You have heard

how a note on a violin, if sounded

repeatedly and in rhythm, will start into motion vibrations
which will in time destroy a bridge. The same result
is true when a regiment of soldiers crosses a bridge, the

order being always given to "break step" on such an occasion, lest the vibration bring down both bridge and regiment. These manifestations of the effect of rhythmic
motion will give you an idea of the effect on the body of
rhythmic breathing. The whole system catches the vibration and becomes in harmony with the will, which causes
the rhythmic motion of the lungs, and while in such complete harmony will respond readily to orders from the will.
With the body thus attuned, the Yogi finds no difficulty in
increasing the circulation in any part of the body by an
order from the will, and in the same way he can direct an
increased current of nerve force to any part or organ,

strengthening and stimulating it.
In the same way the Yogi by rhythmic breathing
"catches the swing," as it were, and is able to absorb and
control a greatly increased amount of prana, which is then
at the disposal of his will. (He can and does use it as a
vehicle for sending forth thoughts to others and for attracting to him all those whose thoughts are keyed in the
same vibration. The phenomena of telepathy, thought
transference, mental healing, mesmerism, etc., which subjects are creating such an interest in the Western world
at the present time, but

which have 'been known to the

SCIENCE OF BEE ATE.

51

fogis for centuries, can be greatly increased and augmented
the person sending forth the thoughts will do so after
rhythmic breathing. Rhythmic breathing will increase the
value of mental healing, magnetic healing, etc., several

if

hundred per cent.
In rhythmic breathing the main thing to be acquired
To those who know anyis the mental idea of rhythm.
thing of music, the idea of measured counting is familiar.

To others, the rhythmic step of the soldier:

"Left, right;

right; left, right; one, two, three, four; one, two, three,
four," will convey the idea.
left,

The Yogi bases his rhythmic time upon a unit corresponding with the beat of his heart. The heart beat varies
in different persons, but the heart beat unit of each person
is the proper rhythmic standard for that particular individual in his rhythmic breathing. Ascertain your normal
heart beat by placing your fingers over your pulse, and
then count: "1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6; 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6," etc., until the
rhythm becomes firmly fixed in your mind. A little practice will fix the rhythm, so that you will be able to easily
reproduce it. The beginner usually inhales in about six
pulse units, but he will be able to greatly increase this by
practice.

The Yogi rule for rhythmic breathing is that the units
of inhalation and exhalation should be the same, while the
units for retention and between breaths should be one-half

the number of those of inhalation and exhalation.
The following exercise in Rhythmic Breathing should
be thoroughly mastered, as it forms the basis of numerous
other exercises, to which reference will be made later.
Sit erect, in an easy posture, being sure to hold
(1)
the chest, neck and head as nearly in a straight line as
possible, with shoulders slightly thrown back and hands
resting easily on the lap. In this position the weight of
the body is largely supported by the ribs and the position
may be easily maintained. The Yogi has found that one
cannot get the best effect of rhythmic breathing with the
chest drawn in and the abdomen protruding.
Inhale slowly a Complete Breath, counting its
(2)

pulse units.
.

;

'

SCIENCE OF BREATH

54
(3)
(4)

Retain, counting three pulse units.
Exhale slowly through the nostrils, counting six

pulse units.
(5)

(6)

Count three pulse beats between breaths.
Repeat a number of times, but avoid fatiguing

yourself at the start.
When you are ready to close the exercise, practice
(7)

the cleansing breath, which will rest you and cleanse the
lungs.

After a little practice you will be able to increase the
duration of the inhalations and exhalations, until about
In this increase, rememfifteen pulse units are consumed.
ber that the units for retention and between breaths is onehalf the units for inhalation and exhalation.
Do not overdo yourself in your effort to increase the
duration of the breath, but pay as much attention as possible to acquiring the "rhythm," as that is more important
than the length of the breath. Practice and try until you

~*j

^

get the measured "swing" of the movement, and until you
can almost "feel" the rhythm of the vibratory motion

your whole body. It will require a little
and perseverance, but your pleasure at your improvement will make the task an easy one. The Yogi is a
most patient and persevering man, and his great attainments are due largely to the possession of these qualities.
throughout
practice

j

CHAP TEE

XIV.
OF
PSYCHIC
YOGI
BEEATHINfcf.
PHENOMENA
With the exception of the instructions in the Yog*
Rhythmic Breathing, the majority of the exercises heretofore given in this book relate to the physical plane of

which, while highly important in itself, is also re
garded by the Yogis as in the nature of affording a substantial basis for efforts on the psychic and spiritual plane,
effort,

Do not, however, discard or think lightly of the physical
phase of the subject, for remember that it needs a sound
body to support a sound mind, and also that the body ii
the temple of the Ego, the lamp in which burns the light
of the Spirit. Everything is good in its place, and everything has its place. The developed man is the "all-around
man," who recognizes body, mind and spirit and renders to
each its due. Neglect of either is a mistake which must
be rectified sooner or later; a debt which must be repaid
with interest.

We will now take up the Psychic phase of tue Yogi
Science of Breath in the shape of a series of exercises, each
exercise carrying with it its explanation.
You will notice that in each exercise rhythmic breathing is accompanied with the instructions to "carry the
thought" of certain desired results. This mental attitude
gives the Will a cleared track upon which to exercise its
We cannot, in this work, go into the subject of the
force.
power of the Will, and must assume that you tave some
knowledge of the subject. If you have no acquaintance
with the subject, you will find that the actual practice of
the exercises themselves will give you a much clearer
knowledge than any amount of theoretical teaching, for as
the old Hindu proverb says, "He who tastes a grain of
mustard seed knows more of its flavor than he who sees

an elephant load of it."
(1)

GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR YOGI PSYCHIC
BREATHING.

The basis of all Yogi Psychic Breathing is the Yogi
Rhythmic Breath, instruction regarding which we gave in
55

SCIENCE OF BEEATR.

86

our last chapter.

In the following exercises, in order to
avoid useless repetition, we will say merely, "Breathe
Rhythmically," and then give the instruction for the exercise of the psychic force, or directed Will power working
in connection with the rhythmic breath vibrations. After
a little practice you will find that you will not need to
count after the first rhythmic breath, as the mind will
grasp the idea of time and rhythm and you will be able to
breathe rhythmically at pleasure, almost automatically.
This will leave the mind clear for the sending of the
psychic vibrations under the direction of the Will. (See
the following first exercise for directions in using the Will.)
(2)

PRANA DISTRIBUTING.

Lying flat on the floor or bed, completely relaxed, with
hands resting lightly over the Solar Plexus (over the pit of
the stomach, where the ribs begin to separate), breathe
rhythmically. After the rhythm is fully establshed will
that each inhalation will draw in an increased supply of

prana or vital energy from the Universal supply, which will
be taken up by the nervous system and stored in the Solar
Plexus. At each exhalation will that the prana or vital
energy is being distributed all over the body, to every organ
ana part; to every muscle, cell and atom; to nerve, artery
and vein; from the top of your head to the soles of your
feet; invigorating, strengthening and stimulating every
nerve; recharging every uerve center; sending energy, force
and strength all over the system. While exercising the
will, try to form a mental picture of the inrushing prana,
coming in through the lungs and being taken up at once
by the Solar Plexus, then with the exhaling effort, being
sent to all parts of the system, down to the finger tips and

down to the toes.

It is not necessary to use the Will with
Simply commanding that which you wish to
produce and then making the mental picture of it is |all
that is necessary. Calm command with the mental picture
is far better than forcible willing, which only
dissipates
force needlessly.
The above exercise is most helpful apd
greatly refreshes and strengthens the nervous system and

an

effort.

j

produces a restful feeling all over the body.

It is especially

f

SCIENCE OF BREATH.
beneficial in cases

57

where one is tired or feels a lack of

energy.
(3)

INHIBITING PAIN.

Lying down or sitting erect, breath rhythmically, holding the thought that you are inhaling prana. Then when
you exhale, send the prana to the painful part to re-estabThen inhale more
lish the circulation and nerve current.
prana for the purpose of driving out the painful condition;
then exhale, holding the thought that you are driving
out the pain. Alternate the two above mental commands,
and with one exhalation stimulate the part and with the
next drive out the pain. Keep this up for seven breaths,
then practice the Cleansing Breath and rest a while. Then
try It again until relief comes, which will be before long.
Many pains will be found to be relieved before the seven
breaths are finished. If the hand is placed over the painful
Send the current of
part, you may get quicker results.
prana down the arm and into the painful part.
(4)

DIRECTING THE CIRCULATION.

Lying down or sitting erect, breathe rhythmically, and
with the exhalations direct the circulation to any part you
wish, which may be suffering from imperfect circulation.
This is effective in cases of cold feet or in cases of headache, the blood being sent downward in both cases, In the
first case warming the feet, and in the latter, relieving the

brain from too great pressure.

In the case of headache, try
the Pain Inhibiting first, then follow with sending the blood

downward. You will often feel a warm feeling in the
legs as the circulation moves downward. The circulation
is largely under the control of the will and rhythmic breathing renders the task easier.
(5)

SELF-HEALING.

Lying in a relaxed condition, breathe rhythmically, and
."ommand that a good supply of prana be inhaled. With
ihe exhalation, send the prana to the affected part for th
purpose of stimulating it. Vary this occasionally by exhaling, with the mental command that the diseased condition be forced out and disappear.
Use the hands in thia

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

d8

exercise, passing them down the body from the head to th*
affected part. In using the hands in healing yourself or

others always hold the mental ima,ge that the prana is flowing down the arm and through the finger tips into the

body, thus reaching the affected part and healing it. Of
course we can give only general directions in this book
without taking up the several forms of disease in detail, but
a little practice of the above exercise, varying it slightly to
fit

the conditions of the case, will produce wonderful reSome Yogis follow the plan of placing both hands

sults.

on the affected part, and then breathing rhythmically, holding the mental image that they are fairly pumping prana
into the diseased organ and part, stimulating it and driving out diseased conditions, as pumping into a pail of
dirty water will drive out the latter and fill the bucket with
fresh water.

This last plan is very effective if the mental

image of the pump is clearly held, the inhalation representing the lifting of the pump handle and the exhalation the
actual pumping.

HEALING OTHERS.
(6)
We cannot take up the question of the psychic treatment of disease by pi ana in detail in this book, as such
would be foreign to its purpose. But we can and will give
you simple, plain instructions whereby you may be enabled
to do much good in relieving others. The main principle
to remember is that by rhythmic breathing and controlled
thought you are enabled to absorb a considerable amount
of prana, and are also able to pass it into the body of
another person, stimulating weakened parts and organs
and imparting health and driving out diseased conditions.
You must first learn to form such a clear mental image of
the desired condition that you will be able to actually feel
the influx of prana, and the force running down your arms
and out of your finger tips into the body of the patient.
Breathe rhythmically a few times until the rhythm is fairly
established, then place your hands upon the atttctecl part
of the body of the patient, letting them rest lightlj ovei
the part.^ Then follow the "pumping" process described
IB the preceding exercise (Self-Healing) and fill thf pationt
m

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

89

fnJl of prana until the diseased condition is driven out.
Every once in a while raise the hands and "flick" t*"j
ingers as if you were throwing off the diseased condition
It is well to do this occasionally and also to wash the
hands after treatment, as otherwise you may take on a

trace of the diseased condition of the patient; Also pracCleansing Breath several times after the treatment

tice the

During the treatment let the prana pour into the patient in
one continuous stream, allowing yourself to be merely the
pumping machinery connecting the patient with the unisupply of prana, and allowing it to flow freely
You need not work the hands vigorously, but
simply enough that the prana freely reaches the affected
The rhythmic breathing must be practiced freparts.
quently during the treatment, so as to keep the rhythm
normal and to afford the prana a free passage. It is better
to place the hands on the bare skin, but where this is not
advisable or possible place them over the clothing. Vary
above method occasionally during the treatment by stroking the body gently and softly with the finger tips, the
fingers being kept slightly separated. This is very soothIn cases of long standing you may find it
ing to the patient.
helpful to give the mental command in words, such as "get
out, get out," or "be strong, be strong," as the case may be,
the words helping you to exercise the will more forcibly
and to the point Vary these instructions to suit the needs
of the case, and use your own judgment and inventive
We have given you the general principles and you
faculty.
can apply them in hundreds of different ways. The above
versal

Hi rough you.

apparently simple instruction, if carefully studied and applied, will enable one to accomplish all that the leading
"magnetic healers" are able to, although their "systems"
are more or less cumbersome and complicated. They are

using prana ignorantly and calling it "magnetism." If
they would combine rhythmic breathing with their "magnetic" treatment they would double their efficiency.
(7)

DISTANT HEALING.

Prana colored by the thought of the sender may b
projected to persons at a distance,

who are willing to re

SCIENCE OF BEE AT H.
celve It, and healing

work done in this way.

This Is th*

secret of the "absent healing," of which the Western world

has heard so much of late years. The thought of the healer
sends forth and colors the prana of the sender, and it
flashes across space and finds lodgment in the psychic mechanism of the patient. It is unseen, and like the Marconi
waves, it passes through intervening obstacles and seeks
the person attuned to receive it. In order to treat persons
at a distance, you must form a mental image of them until
you can feel yourself to be en rapport with them. This is
a psychic process dependent upon the mental imagery
of the healer. You can feel the sense of rapport when it
is established, it manifesting in a sense of nearness.
That
is about as plain as we can describe it.
It may be acquired
by a little practice, and some will get it at the first trial.

When rapport is established, say mentally to the distant
patient, "I am sending you a supply of vital force or power,
which will invigorate you and heal you." Then picture

the prana as leaving your mind with each exhalation of
rhythmic breath, and traveling across space instantaneously
and reaching the patient and healing him. It is not necessary to fix certain hours for treatment, although you may
do so if you wish. The receptive condition of the patient,
as he is expecting and opening himself up to your psychic
force, attunes him to receive

your vibrations whenever you
you agree upon hours, let him place
himself in a relaxed attitude and receptive condition. The
above is the great underlying principle of the "absent treatment" of the Western world. You may do these things as
well as th most noted healers, with a little practice.

may send them.

If

V

CHAPTER XV.
MORE PHENOMENA OF YOGI PSYCHIC BREATHING.
(1)

THOUGHT PROJECTION.

Thoughts may be projected by following the last mentioned method (Distant Healing) and others will feel the
effect of thought so sent forth, it being remembered always
that no evil tnought can ever injure another person whose

thoughts are good. Good thoughts are always positive to
bad ones, and bad ones always negative to good ones. One
can, however, excite the interest and attention of another
by sending him thought waves in this way, charging the
prana with the message he wishes to convey. If you desire
another's love and sympathy, and possess love and sympathy for him, you can send him thoughts of this kind
with effect, providing your motives are pure. Never, however, attempt to influence another to his hurt, or from
impure or selfish motives, as such thoughts only recoil upon
the sender with redoubled force, and injure him, while
the innocent party

is

not affected.

Psychic force

when

legitimately used is all right, but beware of "black magic"
or improper and unholy uses of it, as such attempts are

playing with a dynamo, and the person attempting
such things will be surely punished by the result of the act
itself.
However, no person of impure motives ever acquires
a great degree of psychic power, and a pure heart and mind
like

is

an invulnerable shield against improper psychic power.

Keep yourself pure and nothing can hurt you.
(2)

FORMING AN AURA.

If you are ever in the company of persons of a low
order of mind, and you feel the depressing influence of their
thought, breathe rhythmically a few times, thus generating
an additional supply of prana, and then by means of the

mental image method surround yourself with an egg-shaped
thought aura, which will protect you from the gross thought
*nd disturbing influences of others.

SCIENCE OF

gfi

RECHARGING YOURSELF.

(3)

If you feel that your vital energy is at a low ebb, an!

that you need to store up a new supply quickly, the best
is to place the feet close together (side by side, of

plan

course) and to lock the fingers of both hands in any way
that seems the most comfortable. This closes the circuit,

as it were, and prevents any escape of prana through the
extremities. Then breathe rhythmically a few times, and
YOU will feel the effect of the recharging.
(4)

RECHARGING OTHERS.

If some friend is deficient in vitality

you may aid him
by sitting in front of him, your toes touching his, and his
hands in yours.
Then both breathe rhythmically, you
forming the mental image of sending prana into his system,
and he holding the mental image of receiving the prana.
Persons of weak vitality or passive will should be careful
with whom they try this experiment, as the prana of a
person of evil desires will be colored with the thoughts of
that person, and may give him a temporary influence over
The latter, however, may easily rethe weaker person.
move such influence by closing the circuit (as before mentioned) and breathing a few rhythmic breaths, closing with
the Cleansing Breath.
(5)

CHARGING WATER.

Water may be charged with prana, by breathing
rhythmically, and holding the glass of water by the bottom, in the left hand, and then gathering the fingers of
the right hand together and shaking them gently over
the water, as if you were shaking drops of water off of
your finger tips into the glass. The mental image of the prana
Water
being passed into the water must also be held.
thus charged is found stimulating to weak or sick persons,
particularly if a healing thought accompanies the mental
image of the transfer of the prana. The caution give.i
In the last exercise apylies also to this one, although tJ~
danger exists only in a greatly lessened degree.

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

C3

ACQUIRING MENTAL QUALITIES.

(6)

Wot only can the body be controlled by the mind undel
direction of the will, but the mind itself can be trained
and cultivated by the exercise of the controlling will. This,
which the Western world knows as "Mental Science," etc.,
has proved to the West portions of that truth which tht.
Yogi has known for ages. The mere calm demand of th*.
Will will accomplish wonders in this direction, but if the
mental exercise Is accompanied by rhythmic breathing, the
Desirable qualities may be
effect Is greatly increased.
acquired by holding the proper mental image of what is
Poise and Self Condesired during rhythmic breathing.
trol, desirable qualities; increased power, etc., may be
acquired in this way. Undesirable qualities may be eliminated by cultivating the opposite qua'Jties. Any or all the
"Mental Science" exercises, "treatments" and "affirmations" may be used w.th the Yogi Rhythmic Breath. The
following is a good general exercise for the acquirement
and development of desirable mental qualities:
Lie in a passive attitude, or sit erect. Picture to yourthe

self

as

you

qualities

possessed

of

the

desire
qualities,

to

cultivate,

and

seeing yourself
that your

demanding

mind

Breathe rhythmically, holding
develop the quality.
mental picture firmly.
Carry the mental picture with
rou as much as possible, and endeavor to live up to the

the

you have set up in your mind. You will find yourself
gradually growing up to your ideal. The rhythm of the
breatning assists the mind in forming new combinations,
and the student who has followed the Western system wMl
find
the
a
wonderful
Rhythmic
in
Yogi
his
ally
"Mental Science" works.
<uefal

(7)

ACQUIRING PHYSICAL QUALITIES

Physical qualities may be acquired by the same
ods as above mentioned in connection with mental

mtu
quali-

ties.

We do not mean, of course, that short men can be

made

tall,

or

that

amputated limbs may be replaced,

or

But the expression of the countenance
may be changed; courage and general physical character

similar miracles.

improved by the control of the Will, accompanied hv

SCIENCE. OF BREATH.

14

rhythmic breathing.
walk, sit, etc.

and actions.

As a man thinks so does he look, *o|

Improved thinking will mean improved looK
To develop any part of the body, direct thf

it, while breathing rhythmically, holding the
mental picture that you are sending an increased amount
of prana, or nerve force, to the part, and thus increasing
This plan applies equally
its vitality and developing it.
well to any part of the body which you wish to develop.
Many Western athletes use a modification of this plan in
their exercises. The student who has followed our instructions so far will readily understand h.,w to apply the Yogi
principles in the above work. The general rule of exercise
is the same as in the preceding exercise (acquiring Mental
We have touched upon the subject of the cure
Qualities).
of physical ailments in preceding pages.

attention to

(8)

CONTROLLING THE EMOTIONS.

The undesirable emotions, such is Fear, Worry, AnxHate, Anger, Jealousy, Envy, Melancholy, Excitement,
amenable to the control of the Will, and
the Will is enabled to operate more easily in such cases
if rhythmic breathing is practiced while the student is
The following exercise has been found most
"willing."
effective by the Yogi students, although the advanced Yogi
has but little need of it, as he has long since gotten rid
of these undesirable mental qualities by growing spiritually
beyond them. The Yogi student, however, finds the exercise a great help to
while he is growing.
Breathe rhythmically, concentrating the attention upon
the Solar Plexus, and sending to it the mental command
"Get Out." Send the mental command firmly, just as you
begin to exhale, and form the mental picture of the undesirable emotions being carried away with the exhaled
breath. Repeat seven times, and finish with the Cleansing
Breath, and then see how good you feel. The mental command must he given "in earnest," HS trifling will not d
iety,

Grief, etc., are

mm

the

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

TRANSMUTATION OF THE
ENERGY.

*S>)

65

REPRODUCTIVE

The Yogis possess great knowledge regarding the use
both sexes. Some

x>d abuse of the reproductive principle in

hints of this esoteric knowledge have filtered out and
have been used by Western writers on the subject, and
much good has been accomplished in this way. \n this
Httle book we cannot do more than touch upon the subject,
and omitting all except a bare mention of theory, we will
give a practical breathing exercise wherebj the student
will be enabled to transmute the reproductive energy into
vitality for the entire system, Instead of dissipating and

wasting it in lustful indulgences in or out of the marriage
The reproductive energy is creative energy, and
relations.
may be taken up by the system and transmuted into
strength and vitality, thus serving the purpose of regenIf the youn s jnen of the
Western world understood these underlying principles they
would be saved much misery and unhappiness in after
years, and would be stronger mentally, morally and physic-

eration instead of generation.

ally.

This transmutation of the reproductive energy gives
great vitality to those practicing it. They will be filled
with great vital force, which will radiate from them and
manifest in what has been called "personal magnetThe energy thus transmuted may be turned into new
channels and used to great advantage. Nature has condensed one of its most powerful manifestations of prana
into reproductive energy, as its purpose is to create.
The
greatest amount of vital force IB concentrated in the smallwill

Ism."

The reproductive organism is the most powerful,
storage battery in animal life, and its force can be drawr
upward and used, as well as expended In the ordinary
functions of reproduction, or wasted in riotous lust. The
est area.

majority of our students know something of the theories
of regeneration and we can do little more than to state
Jtne above facts, without attempting to prove them.

The Yogi
.is

simple.

It

for transmuting reproductive energy
coupled with rhythmic bicntHng, arH rar

exercise
is

SCIENCE O* BREATH.
It may be practiced at any time,
be easily performed.
but is specially recommended when one feels the instinct
most strongly, at which time the reproductive energy !i
be most easily transmuted for re[manifesting and may
kenerative purposes. The exercise is as follows:

Keep the mind fixed on the idea of Energy, and away
If these
from ordinary sexual thoughts or imaginings.
thoughts come into the mind do not be discouraged, but
regard them as manifestations of a force which you intend
using for the purposes of strengthening the body and mind.
,Lie passively or sit erect, and fix your mind on the idea
uf drawing the reproductive energy upward to the Solar
Plexus, where it will be transmuted and stored away as a
reserve force of vital energy.

Then breathe rhythmically,

forming the mental iirage of drawing up the reproductive
With each inhalation make
t-nergy with each inhalation.
a command of the Will that the energy be di-awn upward
from the reproductive organization to the Solar Plexus.
If the rhythm is fairly established and the menta! image
is clear, you will be conscious of the upward passage of
the energy, and will feel its stimulating effect.
sire

If you dean increase in mental force, you may draw it up to

the brain instead of to the Solar Pie ~us, by giving the
mental couimand and holding the m< ital image of the

transmission to the brain.
The man or woman doing mental creative work, or bodily
creative work, will be able to use this creative energy in
iheir work by following the above exercise, drawing up
the energy with the inhalation and sending it forth with
the exhalation. In this last form of exercise, only such
portions as are needed in the work will pass into the work
being done, the balance remaining stored up in the Solar
Plexus.

You will understand, of course, that it is not the repro
iuctive fluids which are drawn up and used, but the ethenl
pranic energy which animates the latter, the soul of tht
reproductive organism, as it were. It is usual to allot*
the nead to bend forward easily and naturally during th
transmuting exercise.

SCIENCE OF BBEATH.
(10)

67

BRAIN STIMULATING.

The Yogis have found the following exercise most tuwful in stimulating the action of the brain for the purpose of
producing clear thinking and reasoning. It has a wonderful effect in clearing the brain and nervous system, and
those engaged in mental work will find it most useful to
them, both in the direction of enabling them to do better
work and also as a means of refreshing the mind and clearing it after arduous mental labor.
Sit in an erect posture, keeping the spinal column

r^aight, and the eyes well to the front, letting the hands
Breathe rhythmically,
_*st on the upper part of the legs.
but instead of breathing through both nostrils as in the
ordinary

exercises,

press

the

left

nostril

close

with

the

thumb, and inhale through the right nostril. Then remove
the thumb, and close the right nostril with the finger, and
then exhale through the left nostril. Then, without chang
ing the fingers, inhale through the left nostril, and changing
Then inhale through right
fingers, exhale through the right.
and exhale through left, and so on, alternating nostrils as
above mentioned, closing the unused nostril with the thumb
This is one of the oldest forms of Yogi breath
or forefinger.
ing, and is quite important and valuable, and is well

But it is quite amusing to the
Yogis to know that to the Western world this method is
often held out as being the "whole secret" of Yogi BreathTo the minds of many Western readers, "Yogi
ing.
Breathing" suggests nothing more than a picture of a
Hindu, sitting erect, and alternating nostrils in the act of
breathing. "Only this and nothing more." We trust that
this little work will open the eyes of the Western world
to the great possibilities of Yogi Breathing, and the numerous methods whereby it may be employed.
worthy of acquirement.

(11)

TVits

GRAND YOGI PSYCHIC BREATH.

The Yogis have a favorite form of psychic breathing
which they practice occasionally, to which has been given
a Sanscrit term of which the above is a genera! equivalent.

We have given it last, as it requires practice on the part
of the student in the line of rhythmic breathing and mental

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

38

uiftx;ery, which he has now acquired by tweans of tlw
^receding exercises. The general principles of the Grant.
Breath may be summed up in the old Hindu saying:
"Blessed is the Yogi who can breathe through his bone*."
This exercise will fill the entire system with prana, and
the student will emerge from It with every bone, muscle,
nerve, cell, tissue, organ and part energized and attuned
by the prana and the rhythm of the breath. It is a general housecleaning of the system, and he who practices it
carefully will feel us if he had been given a new body,
freshly created, from the crown of his head to the tips of
his toes. We will let the exercise speak for itself.
Lie in a relaxed position, at perfect ease.
<"1)
Breathe rhythmically until the rhythm is perfectly
(2)

established.
(3)
Then, inhaling and exhaling, form the mental
image of the breath being drawn up through the bones of
the legs, and then forced out through them; then through
the bones of the arma; then through the top of the skull;

then through the stomach; then through the reproductive
region; then as if it were traveling upward and downward
along the spinal column; and then as if the breath were
being inhaled and exhaled through every pore of the skin,
the whole body being filled with prana and life.

Then (breathing rhythmically) send the current
(4)
prana to the Seven Vital Centers, in turn, as follows,
using the mental picture as in previous exercises:

uf

(a)

(b)
(c)

(d)
(e)
(f)

(g)

To the forehead.
To the back of the head.
To the base of the brain.
To the Solar Plexus.
To the Sacral Region (lower part of the spine).
To the region of the navel.
To the reproductive region.

Finish by sweeping the current of prana, to and f*
head to feet several times.
Finifch with Cleansing Breath.
(5)

lorn

CHAPTER XV

i.

YOGI SPIRITUAL BREATHING.
The Yogis not only bring about desired mental quailand properties by will-power coupled with rhythmic
oreathing, but they also develop spiritual faculties, or
rather aid in their unfoldinent, in the same way. The
Oriental philosophies teach that man has many faculties
lies

which are at present in a dormant state, but which will
become unfolded as the race progresses. They also teach
that man, by the proper effort of the will, aided by ravorable conditions, may aid in the unfoldment of these spiritual faculties, and develop them much sooner than in the
In other words, one may
ordinary process of evolution.
even now develop spiritual powers of consciousness which
will not become the common property of the race until
after long ages of gradual development under the law of
evolution. In all of the exercises directed toward this end,
rhythmic breathing plays an important part. There is of
course no mystic property in the breath itself which produces such wonderful results, but the rhythm produced
by the Yogi breath is such as to bring the whole system,
including the brain, under perfect control, and in perfect
harmony, and by this means, the most perfect condition
is obtained for the unfoldment of these latent faculties.
In this work we cannot go deeply into the philosophy
of the East regarding spiritual development, because this
subject would require volumes to cover it, and then again
the subject is too abstruse to interest the average reader.
There are also other reasons, well known to occultists, why
tbis knowledge should not be spread broadcast at this time.

Rest assured, dear student, that when the time comes for
you to take the next step, the way will be opened out before
you. "When the chela (student) is ready, the guru (masIn this chapter we will give you directions
ter) appears/'
for the development of two phases of spiritual consciousness, i. e., (1) the consciousness of the identity of the Soul
nd (2) the consciousness of the connection of the Soul

69

SCIENCE OF BREATH.
with the Universal Life. Both of the exercises given below
are simple, and consist of mental images firmly held,
accompanied with rhythmic breathing. The student must
not expect too much at the start, but must make haste
slowly, and be content to develop as does the flower, from
seed to blossom.

SOUL CONSCIOUSNESS.
The real Self Is not the body or even the mind of man.
These things are but a part of his personality, the lesser
The real Self is the Ego, whose manifestation is
self.
in individuality.

The real Self is independent of the body,

which it inhabits, and is even independent of the mechanism of the mind, which it uses as an instrument. The
real Self is a drop from the Divine Ocean, and is eternal
and indestructible. It cannot die or be annihilated, and
no matter what becomes of the body, the real Self still
exists.

It is the Soul.

Do not think of your Soul as a

thing apart from you, for YOU are the Soul, and the body
is the unreal and transitory part of you which is chang.ng in material every day, and which you will some day
discard.
You may develop the faculties so that they will
be conscious of the reality of the Soul, and its independence of the body. The Yogi plan for such development
is by meditation upon the real Self or Soul, accompanied
The following exercise is the
by rhythmic breathing.
simplest form.
EXERCISE. Place your body in a relaxed, reclining
Breathe rhythmically, and meditate upon the real
position.
Self, thinking of yourself as an entity independent of the
body, although inhabiting it and being able to leave it at
Think of yourself, not as the body, but as a spirit,
will.
and of your body as but a shell, useful and comfortable,
but not a part of the real You. Think of yourself as an
independent being, using the body only as a convenience

While meditating, ignore the body entirely, and you will
flnd that you will often become almost entirely unconscious
of it, and will 8eem to be out of the body to which you
tnay return when you are through with the exercise.
This is the gist of the Yogi meditative breathing
V

SCIENCE OF BEE AT V.

Tl

and if persisted in will give one a wonderful
of the reality of the Soul, and will make him seem
almost independent of the body. The sense of immortality
lethods,

iens

will often come with this increased consciousness, and
the person will begin to show signs of spiritual development which will be noticeable to himself and others. But
he must not allow himself to live too much in the upper

regions, or to despise his body, for he is here on this plane
for a purpose, and he must not neglect his opportunity
to gain the experiences necessary to round him out. nor
must he fail to respect his body, which is the Temple of

the Spirit.

THE UNIVERSAL CONSCIOUSNESS.
The Spirit in man, which is the highest manifestation
is a drop in the ocean of Spirit, apparently
separate and distinct, but yet really in touch with the
ocean itself, and with every other drop in it. As man
unfolds in spiritual consciousness he becomes more and
more aware of his relation to the Universal Spirit, or Universal Mind as some term it. He feels at times ai it he

of his Soul,

were almost at-one-ment with it, and then again he loses
the sense of contact and relationship.
The Yogis seek
to attain this state of Universal Consciousness by meditation and rhythmic breathing, and many have thus attained
the highest degree of spiritual attainment possible to man

The student of this work
not need the higher instruction regarding adeptship
at this time, as he has much to do and accomplish before
he reaches that stage, but it may be well to initiate him
into the elementary stages of the Yogi exercises for developing Universal Consciousness, and if he is in earnest
he will discover means and methods whereby he may
in this stage of his existence.

will

progress.

The way is always opened to him who is ready

to tread the path.
The following exercise will be found
to do much toward developing the Universal Conscious-

ness In those who faithfully practice it.
EXERCISE. riace your body in a reclining, relaxed
^ositloa. Breathe rhythmically, and meditate upon your
'Htlonship with the Universal Mind of which you a

f

or

f2

SCIENCE OF BREATH.

but an atom. Think of yourself as being in touch with
See All as One, and your
411, and nt-one-ment with All.
Soul as a part of that One. Fel that you are receiving
the vibrations from the great Universal Mind, and are

The
partaking of its power and strength and wisdom.
two following lines of meditation may be followed.
With each inhalation, think of yourself as draw
(a)
'.ng in to yourself the strength and power of the Universal
Mind. When exhaling think of yourself as passing out
to others that same power, at the same time being filled
with love for every living thing, and desiring that it be
a partaker of the same blessings which you are now reLet the Universal Power circulate through you.
ceiving.
Place your mind in a reverential state, and medi(b)
tate upon the grandeur of the Universal Mind, and open
yourself to the inflow of the Divine Wisdom, which will
fill you with illuminating wisdom, and then let the same
flow out from you to your brothers and sisters whom
you love and would help.
This exercise leaves with those who have practiced
a new-found sense of strength, power and wisdom,
and a feeling of spiritual exaltation and bliss. It must
be practiced only in a serious, reverential mood, and must
not be approached triflingly or lightly.
it

GENERAL DIRECTIONS.
The exercises given in this chapter require the proper
mental attitude and conditions, and the trifler and person
of a non-serious nature, or one without a sense of spirituality and reverence, had better pass them by, as no
results will be obtained by such persons, and besides it
is a wilful trifling with things of a
high order, which
course never beiiefits those who pursue it. These exercises
are for the few who can understand them, and the others
will feel no attraction to try them.
^j During meditation let the mind dwell upon the ideas
given in the exercise, until it becomes clear to the mind,
and gradually manifests in real consciousness within you.
The mind will gradually become passive and at rest, and
Do not indulge
the mental image will manifest clearly.

SCIENCE OV BEE ATE.
In these exercises too often, and do not allow the blisstvu
state produced to render you dissatisfied with the affairs of
life, as the latter are useful and necessary for
and you must never shirk a lesson, however dis
agreeable to you it may be. Let the Joy arising from the
unfolding consciousness buoy you up and nerve you for
the trials of life, and not make you dissatisfied and dis
gusted. All is good, and everything has its place.
Man;

everyday
jou,

who practice these exercises will in time
Rest assured that when the time
comes we will see that you do not seek in vain. Go on in

of the students

wish to know more.

courage and confidence,

keeping your face toward the
from whence comes the rising Sun.
Peace be unto you, and unto all men.

blast,

A.UM.

I.

ill'iS-. I; !|U|. Ill H:; I. ;l!lli: tllllH.it, ill;i;:'.liKlnilillHii|!ll| |:.i,:|,!i,.;!,n;i!;8i i

.

;

!

l

in; iinilliliiiillliisllii.ll!!

HATHA YOGA
THE YOGI PHILOSOPHY OF

PHYSICAL WELL-BEING
WITH NUMEROUS EXERCISES, ETC.
By YOGI RAMACHARAKA
Author of "Science of Breath," Yogi Philosophy and Oriental

Occultism," Etc.

A Complete Manual of the Great Oriental Yogi System of
Physical Weil-Being Health Strength and Vigor. It
Preaches a Sane, Normal, Simple Theory of Physical
Health, and tells how to put the theory into practice. It
teaches that the

Body is the Temple of the Soul, and

should be kept clean and in good order.
the healthy Man and Woman.
tion and mankind to conform

Its

keynote is

Its purpose, the instruc-

to the standard of thst

healthy man or woman.

Bound in Blue Silk Cloth, Lettered in Gold, 250 Pages.
Price, |2.00 Postpaid.

THE SCIENCE OF

Psychic Healing
By YOGI RAMACHARAKA

A plain, practical series of lessons on Mental, Psychic and Spiritual
its many phases and forms, with full instructions and directions regarding treatment, etc., very
little theory, but much practical instruction.

Healing, in

"All true healing results from an application of perfectly natural
laws and the power employed is as much a natural law as is elec-

Here is a partial list of subjects treated:
How to Get Full Nourishment from
the Food You Eat The Instinctive Mind How the Body Carries
on Its Works of Regeneration The Three Forms of Psychic Healing The Principles of Pranic Healing Yogi Teachers and Pranic
Healing 2,500 Years Ago Laying On of Hands, Magnetic HealThe Practice of Pranic Healing
ing, etc., During the Middle Ages
'Means of Conveying Vital Force Stroking, Rubbing, Kneading
and Massage Breath Treatment Pranic Breathing Rhythmic
tricity."

Natural Laws of the Body

Breathing

General Directions

How to Pre-

Pranic Treatments

pare the Hands Distant Healing How Accomplished AutoPranic Treatments Inhibiting Pain Thought-Force Healing
How to Apply It to Liver Troubles, Constipation, Rheumatism, the
etc.
Suggestive Healing Practice of Suggestive
Self-Suggestion Mental Healing Metaphysical Healing
Spiritual Healing How to Become a Healer.

Nerves,

etc.,

Healing

196 Pages;

Bound in Silk Cloth; Stamped in Gold.
Price, $2.00 Postpaid.

iiiniii|iiiii'i<:|!:ij'i;iiiiiifiiii!iiiiiii'|i>ifi|!:iniij!iiniiii,ii

t

i

i

t

.

i

it t i

i

j

i

t

j

i

t

:

i

i

The Hindu-Yogi System of
Practical Water Cure
By YOGI RAMACHARAKA
The Hindu- Yogi Water Cure An Important Branch
Yoga The Underlying Principle Prana in the Water
How Water Loses Prana How Water May be Pranaized. Chapter II.
Nature's Great Remedy Water the Basis of Life The
Important Part Played by Water in the Psychological Mechanism
of the System What Water Does, and Why.
Chapter III. Water
Drinking Why Man Needs Water How Much Water He Needs
What He Suffers from Neglecting the Normal Amount of Fluids
An Important Secret Surprising Facts. Chapter IV. The
Chapter I.

of Hatha

Stomach and Intestines A Plain, Practical, Scientific Description
of the Organs of Assimilation and Elimination Something that
Everyone Should Know to be Healthy. Chapter V. The Obstructed Sewer A Scientific Statement Regarding the Great Sewer
of the System, Which When Clogged, Obstructed and Choked with
Waste-Matter, Causes Disease and Weakness. Chapter VI. The
Internal Bath The Scientific Method of Keeping Clean the Great
Sewer of the System A Simple Method of Internal Cleanliness,
and Resulting Health. Chapter VII. The Skin A Plain Scientific Description of the Skin, and the Part it Plays in Health and
Disease Something that Everyone Should Know, but Few Realize.
Chapter VIII. Scientific Bathing Scientific Methods of Bathing
The Cleansing Bath The Non-Drying Bath The Hot Bath
The Cold Bath Hardening Baths Private Information. Chapter
IX. Pack Treatments The Wet Sheet Pack, and I*ow to Apply It
The Half Pack The Sweat Pack Endosmose and Exosmose
Hydropathy in a Nut Shell. Chapter X. Other Valuable Methods
Fomentations, or Hot Steam Applications Water Bandages and
Compresses Hot Water Compresses, and Cold Water Bandages
Special Applications

Sexual Vitality Treatments

Special Applica-

tions, etc.

This book has just been published, although Yogi Ramach*v,ka
wrote it some Mme ago.
Price, 60

Cnts Postpaid.

University of California

SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY
305 De Neve Drive - Parking Lot 17
Box 951388
LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA 90095-1388
Return this material to the library from which it was borrowed.

A

LOS

000 341 053

7

